                                                                                    CHAPTER 1


                    Foods, Nutrition and Health


     Definitions
         Food
         Nutrition
         Adequate Nutrition
         Nutritional Status
         Malnutrition
         Nutritional Care
         Health
     Functions of Food
        Physiological, Social and Psychological Functions
     Functions of Nutrients
        Carbohydrates, Fats, Proteins, Vitamins, Minerals and Water
     Food Composition
        Food Exchange Lists
        Nutrient Density
        How Will you be a Responsible Nutrition Student?
     Study Questions



      FOOD HAS been a basic part of our existence. Through the centuries we have acquired a wealth
of information about the use of food to ensure growth of children and youth, to maintain good health
through life, and to meet special needs of pregnancy and lactation and to use it to recover from illness.
      When you study food composition you will know the nutritional contribution of foods. You may
have been told that certain foods are very important for maintaining good health, while others are
harmful. As you study the science of Foods and Nutrition, you will need to examine the ideas you have
about foods very carefully and accept or reject these in the light of the knowledge you will acquire.
Whatever you learn in this area should be used and applied in your personal life.
      A large part of our food heritage is scientifically beneficial and needs to be retained; some aspects
may need to be modified in the view of the changes in our lifestyle.
      Food is an important topic of conversations, articles in newspapers and magazines, as also of
advertisements. Some of this information may be correct, but a large part of it may not be. As you learn
4                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

this subject, you will be able to spread the knowledge gained to those around you, so that they discard
false ideas about food, which interfere with their food selection and affect their health.
      Food, nutrition and health are intimately connected aspects of our life. Let us start our study by
defining these and related terms.

Definitions
       Food is that which nourishes the body. Food may also be defined as anything eaten or drunk,
which meets the needs for energy, building, regulation and protection of the body. In short, food is the
raw material from which our bodies are made. Intake of the right kinds and amounts of food can
ensure good nutrition and health, which may be evident in our appearance, efficiency and emotional
well-being (Figure 1.1).
       Nutrition has been defined as food at work in the body. Nutrition includes everything that happens
to food from the time it is eaten until it is used for various functions in the body. Nutrients are components
of food that are needed by the body in adequate amounts in order to grow, reproduce and lead a normal,
healthy life. Nutrients include water, proteins, fats, carbohydrates, minerals and vitamins. There are
several nutrients in each of the groups: proteins, fats, carbohydrates, minerals and vitamins; hence the
plural form of these words has been used. Thus there are over 40 essential nutrients supplied by food,
which are used to produce literally thousands of substances necessary for life and physical fitness.
       The study of the science of nutrition deals with what nutrients we need, how much we need,
why we need these and where we can get them. Nutrition is the result of the kinds of foods supplied to
the body and how the body uses the food supplied.
       Adequate, optimum and good nutrition are expressions used to indicate that the supply of the
essential nutrients is correct in amount and proportion. It also implies that the utilisation of such
nutrients in the body is such that the highest level of physical and mental health is maintained throughout
the life-cycle.




                           Figure 1.1: A well-nourished child engrossed in play.
Foods, Nutrition and Health                                                                              5

       Nutritional status is the state of our body as a result of the foods consumed and their use by the
body. Nutritional status can be good, fair or poor.
       The characteristics of good nutritional status are an alert, good natured personality, a well
developed body, with normal weight for height, well developed and firm muscles, healthy skin, reddish
pink colour of eyelids and membranes of mouth, good layer of subcutaneous fat, clear eyes, smooth
and glossy hair, good appetite and excellent general health. General good health is evident by stamina
for work, regular meal times, sound regular sleep, normal elimination and resistance to disease.
       Poor nutritional status is evidenced by a listless, apathetic or irritable personality, undersized
poorly developed body, abnormal body weight (too thin or fat and flabby body), muscles small and
flabby, pale or sallow skin, too little or too much subcutaneous fat, dull or reddened eyes, lustreless and
rough hair, poor appetite, lack of vigour and endurance for work and susceptibility to infections. Poor
nutritional status may be the result of poor food selection, irregularity in schedule of meals, work, sleep
and elimination.
       The WHO (World Health Organization) has defined health as the ‘state of complete physical,
mental and social well-being and not merely the absence of disease or infirmity’.
       Malnutrition means an undesirable kind of nutrition leading to ill-health. It results from a lack,
excess or imbalance of nutrients in the diet. It includes undernutrition and overnutrition. Undernutrition
is a state of an insufficient supply of essential nutrients.
       Malnutrition can be primarily be due to insufficient supply of one or more essential nutrients; or
it can be secondary, which means it results from an error in metabolism, interaction between nutrients
or nutrients and drugs used in treatment.
       Overnutrition refers to an excessive intake of one or more nutrients, which creates a stress in the
bodily function.
       Diet refers to whatever you eat and drink each day. Thus it includes the normal diet you consume
and the diet people consume in groups (hostel diet). Diet may also be modified and used for ill persons
as part of their therapy (therapeutic diets).
       Nutritional care is the use of nutritional knowledge in planning meals and the preparation of
these meals in an acceptable and attractive manner to feed people. It involves assessment of the exiting
meal patterns and improving these in an acceptable manner. While the nutritional plan may be general
for a group of people, the actual execution is individualized to suit the person’s needs and background.
Thus one has to use a lot of ingenuity to succeed in making nutritional care effective in practical terms.
       Health the word health refers to the condition of the body, good health not only implies freedom
from disease, but physical, mental and emotional fitness as well.

Functions of Food
      Physiological functions of food. The first function of the body is to provide energy. The body
needs energy to sustain the involuntary processes essential for continuance of life, to carry out
professional, household and recreational activities, to convert food ingested into usable nutrients in the
body, to grow and to keep warm. The energy needed is supplied by the oxidation of the foods consumed.
      The foods we eat become a part of us. Thus one of the most important functions of food is
building the body. A newborn baby weighing 2.7-3.2 kg can grow to its potential adult size of 50–60
kg if the right kinds and amounts of food are eaten from birth to adulthood. The food eaten each day
helps to maintain the structure of the adult body, and to replace worn out cells of the body.
6                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      The third function of food is to regulate activities of the body. It includes regulation of such
varied activities as:
        • Beating of the heart
        • Maintenance of the body temperature
        • Muscle contraction
        • Control of water balance
        • Clotting of blood
        • Removal of waste products from the body
      The fourth function of food is to improve our body’s resistance to disease.
      The Social Functions of Food. Food has always been a central part of our social existence. It
has been a part of our community, social, cultural and religious life. Special foods are distributed as a
benediction or prasad in the religious functions in homes, temples and churches. Feasts are given at
specific stages of life such as birth, naming ceremony, birthdays, marriages, etc. Most of the religious
festivals also call for feasts and feeding of specific segments of the population. Certain menus are
associated with most of these feasts in each region.
      Food has been used as an expression of love, friendship and social acceptance. It is also used as
a symbol of happiness at certain events in life, for example, pedhas are distributed to announce success
in examinations, or the birth of a baby; laddus are associated with the celebration of Deepavali and
marriages, cakes are associated with Christmas and birthdays and tilgul with sankranti the festival of
friendship.
      As food is an integral part of our social existence, this function is important in daily life.
Refreshments served at get-togethers or meetings create a relaxed atmosphere. The menu for such
get-together should bring the people together, rather than divide them. This basic aspect should be
considered in planning menus for such occasions (Figure 1.2).

            Love and Security                  Food
                                                                                     Party




                          Energy                                Growth and Renewal



                                              Regulation

                                     Figure 1.2: Functions of food.
Foods, Nutrition and Health                                                                                7

      The Psychological Functions of Food. In addition to satisfying physical and social needs, food
must satisfy certain emotional needs. These includes a sense of security, love and attention. Thus
familiar foods make us feel secure. Anticipating needs and fulfilling these are expressions of love and
attention. These sentiments are the basis of the normal attachment to the mother’s cooking.
      Sharing of food is a token of friendship and acceptance. In a friendly gathering we try unfamiliar
foods and thus enlarge our food experiences. It must be noted that even a nutritionally balanced meal
may not be satisfying to the individual, if the foods included are unfamiliar or distasteful to him/her.
With time and repeated experience, strange foods become familiar and new tastes are formed.
      These aspects are important in food acceptance and must be considered in planning meals, which
are not only nutritionally adequate, but also enjoyable for the group for whom they are intended.

Functions of Nutrients
      The foods which we use daily include rice, wheat, dal, vegetables, fruits, milk, eggs, fish, meat,
sugar, butter, oils, etc. These different foods are made up of a number of chemical components called
nutrients. These are classified according to their chemical composition.
      Each nutrient class has its own function, but the various nutrients must act in unison for effective
action. The nutrients found in foods are — carbohydrates, proteins, fats, minerals, vitamins and water.
Fibre is also an essential component of our diet. The functions of nutrients are given below.
      Carbohydrates: Starch found in cereals and sugar in sugarcane and fruits are examples of
carbohydrates in foods. The chief function of carbohydrates is to provide energy needed by our body.
Those not used immediately for this purpose are stored as glycogen or converted to fat and stored, to
be mobilised for energy supply when needed.
      Fats: Oils found in seeds, butter from milk, and lard from meat, are examples of fats found in
foods. Fats are concentrated sources of energy, carriers of fat soluble vitamins and a source of essential
fatty acids. If excess fats are taken in the diet, these are stored as fat reserves in the body. Energy taken
in excess of body needs, is stored as fat in the body.
      Proteins: Casein from milk, albumin in egg, globulins in legumes and gluten in wheat, are examples
of proteins occurring in foods. The main function of protein is the building of new tissues and maintaining
and repair of those already built. Synthesis of regulatory and protective substances such as enzymes,
hormones and antibodies is also a function of food proteins. About 10 per cent of the total energy is
supplied by proteins in the diet. Protein, when taken in excess of the body’s need, is converted to
carbohydrates and fats and is stored in the body.
      Minerals: The minerals calcium, phosphorus, iron, iodine, sodium, potassium and others are
found in various foods in combination with organic and inorganic compounds. Minerals are necessary
for body-building, for building of bones, teeth and structural parts of soft tissues. They also play a role
in regulation of processes in the body, e.g., muscle contraction, clotting of blood, nerve stimuli, etc.
      Vitamins: Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E and K and also water-soluble vitamins C and B group are
found in foods. These are needed for growth, normal function of the body and normal body processes.
      Water: We get water in foods we eat and a major part from the water we drink as such and as
beverages. Water is an essential part of our body structure and it accounts for about 60 per cent of our
body weight. Water is essential for the utilisation of food material in the body and also for elimination of
food waste. It is a regulator of body processes such as maintenance of body temperature.
8                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      All individuals need the same nutrients for the same body function. The only variation is in the
amounts of each nutrient required according to age, size, activity, etc. For example, all persons need
energy for work, but a man, who carries loads may need more energy than a man, who works in an
office at a desk job.
      As you know, we get the nutrients from the foods and the beverages we consume. Most foods
contain the nutrients in varying amounts. Let us understand the nutrient composition of the foods we
use everyday.

Food Composition
      Most food contain more than one nutrient. The nutrient contents of foods have been determined
by analysing these in the laboratory. The composition of over 650 Indian foods has been determined.
Of these, the nutritive value of about 160 foods is presented in the Appendix F.
      The food composition tables give the concentration of nutrients in 100 g of the edible portion
(E.P.) of the food. Therefore it is important to know how much of the food purchased is edible. In
some foods, such as milk, butter, sugar, the edible portion is 100 per cent. In fruits and vegetables, it
varies from 65 per cent in bananas to 98 per cent in tomatoes.
      The values for nutrients given in food composition tables are averages of the results obtained by
analysing a large number of samples of each food. Therefore the figures in such tables give a fairly
good idea of the composition of each food.
      Foods are grouped in the food value tables, on the basis of the plant part from which the food is
derived, for example, seeds, roots, leaves, fruits, etc. Animal foods are grouped on the basis of species
and the product used.
      It is interesting to note that there are inherent similarities in the composition of foods in each
group. In Table 1.1, the composition of various foods has been presented to illustrate this point. For
example, the protein content of cereals varies from 7 to 12, and that of dals and legumes from 17 to 25
per cent. This information has important applications in practical usage of tables. It is possible to
predict the overall nutrient content of combinations used, if we know the amounts of individual foods
used. If the composition of a particular food is not found in the tables, you can roughly predict its
nutrient contribution, by knowing the group to which it belongs.
      You may observe from Table 1.1, that cereals and dals do not contain vitamins A and C. Therefore
you will realise how important it is to include vegetables and fruits, which are rich source of these two
vitamins, in our daily menu of cereals and dal. Most of the vegetablres and fruits, as you will observe
from Table 1.1, are low in calories. Oils, fats and sugars are mainly sources of calories. Thus you get
an idea of the contribution of various foods by studying Table 1.1.
      Most of the analytical work on Indian foods was carried out in various laboratories under the
auspices of Indian Council of Medical Research. A compilation of results is published as the Nutritive
Value of Indian Foods, by the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR). A number of new varieties
of food with high contents of certain nutrients, have been developed at research centres under the
auspices of the Indian Council of Agricultural Research. You get a number of these foods in the market
and use these in your dietary. The nutritive value of these new varieties of foods need to be included in
the book on Nutritive Value of Indian Foods. There are two International Food Value tables published by
Foods, Nutrition and Health                                                                                9

the Food & Agriculture Organisation (FAO) (please refer to these books, which are listed in Further
Reading at the end of this book).
      It is good to remember that the nutritive value of natural foods does not vary a great deal for a
particular variety of the same food from one country to another. But there is a great variation in the
composition of prepared foods such as bread, biscuits, cakes, etc., due to variation in recipes and the
basic ingredients used from one region to another.
                              Table 1.1: Food Composition at a Glance1
                                    (Approx. Group Values per 100 g. E.P.)

                                                                        Vit. A      Vit. C     Minerals
     Foods                 Moisture         Calories   Protein (g)     (mcg.)       (mg)        & Vit.
                                                                                               B-Comp

    Cereals-rice,              10             340         7 to 12        —           —           Some
      Wheat, bajra,
      Jowar
    Dals, legumes              10             340        17 to 25        —           —          Some2
    Milk                       85              70            3           48          —          Some3
    Eggs                       75             170           13           960         —           Some
    Meat, fish, poultry        75           100–190         18          Some         —           Some

    Leafy &                    90              20            2          1,800        30          Some
      Orange-yellow
      Vegetables &
      Fruits
    Fruits-Vit. C-rich         85              50            1          Some         50          Some
    Other vegetables           90              30            2          Some        Some         Some
    Other Fruits               85              50            1          Some        Some         Some
    Roots & tubers            60–85          50–100          1          Some        Some         Some
    Oils & Fats                 0             900           —           7504         —               —
    Sugar, jaggery              0             400           —            —           —               —
       1.   Please refer to Appendix F for individual composition of foods.
       2.   Rich source of iron and B-complex.
       3.   Rich source of calcium and riboflavin.
       4.   Ghee contains this amount and vanaspati is fortified to provide this amount of Vit. A.


Food Exchange Lists
     In 1950, the American Diabetes Association and the American Dietetic Association collaboratively
developed a system of food lists to help diabetic patients to select foods in their diets. Similar food lists
10                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

were prepared in other countries to help diabetics to choose their foods. In India also food lists were
prepared based on the foods available and our meal pattern. Since India is a large country there are
three major agencies that have evolved their food exchange lists. These agencies are dietetic departments
of major regional hospitals, the Home Science colleges, which train dietetic students, and the dietetics
department of the National Institute of Nutrition. These are presented in Appendix B.
      Each of the list includes a group of foods, which supply about the same calories in the portion
indicated. Each food choice within a list is called an exchange. It represents an amount of food that has
about the same macronutrient value as other foods in the same group.
      The exchange lists are very useful tools in diet planning in hospitals and in personal diet management
in the home.
Nutrient Density
     It refers to the quantity of one or more nutrients supplied by a food in reference to its calorie
content. For example, if one compares the protein content of isocaloric portions of dal, bread and milk,
one can see that dal has the highest nutrient density for protein, milk next and bread the least.
                                                Calories                Protein
                             Dal                     85                     5.5
                             Milk                    85                     4.0
                             Bread                   85                     2.4

      Thus nutrient density is an important aspect to be considered in selection of foods, especially in
diets of children, pregnant women, nursing mothers and in therapeutic diets for patients.
How will you be a responsible nutrition student?
      First, use what you learn in nutrition and benefit yourself. It will help you to look better, feel
better and work effectively. By practising what you learn, you will set a good example for others.
      Secondly take care of nutrition of your family. Help the children in the family to develop good
food habits, the adults to make good food choices in eating and seniors to meet their changed needs.
      Thirdly, as a professional you will be able to help people, who seek your advice, to make appropriate
changes to improve their food choices to improve their well-being.
      Lastly, as a member of the community, you can influence the choice of foods served in social
events.

Study Questions
      1.   Explain the terms nutrition, nutrients, nutritional care, optimum nutrition and undernutrition.
      2.   How is food related to health?
      3.   Discuss the physiological functions of food.
      4.   “Food is also used to satisfy social and psychological needs”. Explain this statement by
           giving examples.
      5.   What do you understand by adequate nutrition?
      6.   Explain the concept of exchange lists.
      7.   What is nutrient density?
      8.   How will you use your knowledge of nutrition?
                                                                                  CHAPTER 2


     Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of
                                         Nutrients


     Introduction
     Basic Concepts of Biology and Chemistry
     Digestion and Absorption of Nutrients
        Carbohydrates
        Proteins
        Lipids
        Other Nutrients
        Factors Affecting Digestion
     Role of Large Intestine
     Utilisation of Nutrients in the Body
          Glycolysis
          Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle (TCA)
          Beta-oxidation of Fatty Acids
     Amino Acids
        Deamination
        Transamination
        Urea formation
     Study Questions



Introduction
      OUR BODY is synthesised from the food we eat. It is made of a complex structure of cells,
tissues and organs. How does this change from food to our body structure occur? All the changes that
occur in the food from the time we eat it, to its use in the body and discarding of the waste matter are
known as metabolism. One can describe metabolism of each nutrient separately to ensure ease of
understanding. But actually it occurs in a correlated systematic manner.
      Basic concepts of biology and chemistry need to be understood in the study of nutrition. Let us
review these.
12                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Concepts in Biology: The study of nutrition begins with the cell, the basic unit of our body. All
the nutrition processes, which we refer to as metabolism, take place in the cell. Metabolism includes
both anabolism and catabolism. Anabolism involves synthesis of compounds needed for use in the
body. Breakdown of complex substances to simpler ones is known as catabolism. Thus cells are able
to take up nutrients, synthesise substances they need and eliminate wastes. The energy release and its
utilisation occurs in the cell.
       There are many kinds of cells in the body, each type specialises in carrying out certain functions
required by the body.
       Cells are grouped together to form a tissue. Muscle, nerve, epithelial and connective tissue are
examples of various tissues.
       Two or more tissues are combined to form an organ, which carries out a specific function. Heart,
lungs and kidneys are examples of organs.
       Cells are made up of several parts. Each part has an appropriate structure and a specific function.
Two main parts of the cell are the nucleus and the protoplasm, which surrounds the nucleus and is
called cytoplasm (Figure 2.1).




Figure 2.1: Diagram of a typical cell based on electron micrographs. (Adapted from “The Living Cell” by J.
               Bracket. Copyright © 1961 by Scientific American, Inc. All rights reserved.)
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                     13

      The nucleus controls the functions of the cell; the metabolic activities of the cell are carried out
by the cytoplasm.
      The deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) in the cell nucleus contains the pattern for each of the different
proteins in the body. The ribonucleic acid (RNA) directs the actual protein synthesis in the ribosomes,
using the information stored in the DNA. This process, which is directed and controlled by DNA, is the
key to nutrition.
      All the components, which form nutrients, come from food. Our genes determine the nutrients
that can be synthesised in the body and those which need to be provided preformed in the food.
      The small channels in the cytoplasm, called endoplasmic reticulum, transport nutrients and their
metabolites throughout the cytoplasm. The enzymes, which function in metabolism, are found in the
membranes surrounding the channels.
      The mitochondria and lysosomes are also present in the cytoplasm. Mitochondria release the
energy provided by the carbohydrates, fats and proteins and transfer it to an energy acceptor (ATP).
The ATP transfers the energy as needed wherever work is being done. Therefore the mitochondria are
known as the ‘power plants’ of the cell.
      Lysosomes contain enzymes, which function in the breakdown of proteins and other compounds.
Lysosomes help to digest foreign matter that may have entered the cell and thus protect the body from
their harmful effects.
      Chemistry: Our body and the food that nourishes it are made of chemical elements. Therefore
knowledge of the chemical elements and their behaviour is basic to the study of nutrition.
      Elements: Elements are fundamental units of matter, which have characteristic properties. The
Periodic Table contains all the elements. Of the 106 known elements, 92 occur in nature, the rest are of
synthetic origin. Examples of elements are oxygen, carbon and iron.
      Atoms: The smallest constituent part of an element is an atom. There are smaller particles, which
are parts of an atom. The proton (+vely charged) and neutron (uncharged) particle are located in the
nucleus of the atom. In the shells (orbits) around the nucleus, the electron, a negatively charged
particle is found.
      Atoms of one element can combine with atoms of another element to form a compound. For
example, water contains two atoms of hydrogen and one of oxygen (H2O).
      Molecule: Chemical elements exist as molecules, a basic unit, which can be made up of atoms of
one or more elements. Thus we have a molecule of oxygen (O2) with two atoms of oxygen, while
sodium chloride (NaCl) contains one atom of sodium and one atom of chlorine.
      Ion: An electrically charged atom, group or molecule is called an ion. A positively, charged ion is
called a cation, and a negatively charged one an anion. K+ is an example, of a positive atom and Cl– is
a negative atom; potassium chloride (KCl) is a neutral compound.
      Isotopes: Some elements have isotopes, that is they exist in two forms, with two different
atomic weights; for example, the atomic weight of carbon is 12, its isotope has an atomic weight of 14
(14C). The 14C isotope of carbon is naturally radioactive.
      Acids, Bases, pH: A chemical compound, which when dissolved in water yields hydrogen ions
(H+), is an acid. There are two types of acids, inorganic acids and organic acids. Hydrochloric, sulfuric
and phosphoric are inorganic acids. Organic or carboxylic acids contain one or more carboxyl groups
(COOH) in their molecule. Fatty acids and amino acids are important organic acids in nutrition.
      Hydrogen ion concentration is the amount of hydrogen ion (H+) per unit volume of an aqueous
(water) solution. It is referred to as pH.
14                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Some Chemical Reactions: Some chemical reactions, which occur in biological systems, are
listed here.
       1. Salt formation: When an acid and a base react, salt is one of the products formed.
                                       HCl + KOH        → KCl + H2O
                                       acid + base      → salt + water
       2. Ester formation: When an organic acid reacts with an alcohol, an ester is formed. When a
           fatty acid reacts with glycerol, a fat (an ester) is formed.
       3. Oxidation-reduction: Oxidation is always accompanied by a reduction, in which electrons
           are transferred from one atom to another. The atom that gives up the electron is oxidised, the
           one that receives the electron is reduced. Thus ferric ion is reduced by vitamin C to ferrous
           form.
                                      Fe+++ + reduced form of vit. C →
                                      Fe++ + oxidised form of vitamin C
       4. Hydrolysis: The reaction of water with another compound, with uptake of a molecule of
           water, is known as hydrolysis. The breakdown of carbohydrates and fats in digestion is an
           example of hydrolysis.
       5. Phosphorylation: is a chemical reaction in which a phosphate group is introduced into an
           organic compound. The formation of ATP from ADP is an example of this reaction.
       6. Synthesis: When a complex substance is formed from simpler substances by a series of
           reactions it is known as synthesis. Synthesis of proteins from amino acids is a good example
           of this reaction.
       7. Degradation: Complex substances are gradually broken down to simpler ones. The
           breakdown of glycogen to glucose is an example of degradation reaction.

Use of Food in the Body
      The use of food in the body involves three processes — digestion, absorption and utilisation of
nutrients in the body.
      Digestion is the process, which releases many nutrients in the forms the body can use, by
breaking up food in the intestinal tract.
      Absorption is the process which carries these nutrients into the circulation system and delivers
them to the cell.
      Utilisation. Cell is the functional unit of life. Hence a large number of the chemical reactions in
the cell utilise the nutrients absorbed to produce materials needed for our existence.
      Mechanical processes involved in digestion include chewing of food, swallowing of food, churning
action in the stomach and rhythmic contraction of the intestinal tract.
      Chewing of food reduces the food particles in size, mixes these with saliva and dilutes it with
water, so that it is easy to swallow. The food swallowed is mixed with enzymes and acid by the
churning action in the stomach. Further the rhythmic contraction of the intestine, help to break the
food into small particles and move the food mass forward through the digestive tract (Figure 2.2).
      Chemical reactions in digestion process: The first reaction is hydrolysis or splitting with the
help of water. Carbohydrates, fats and proteins break up with the addition of water into smaller molecules,
which the tissues can use.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                      15




                                      Figure 2.2: The digestive tract.

      The chemical reactions are accelerated by enzymes, which are secreted in the mouth, stomach
and small intestine. Enzymes are living catalysts, that increase the speed of biological reactions, without
being a part of the compound formed. The enzymatic reactions, which take place in the digestion
process, are presented in Table 2.1.
      As you may know, enzymes are proteins by nature. Their name indicates substance on which
they can act, for example, sucrase acts on sucrose. Enzymes are specific in their actions. An enzyme,
which hydrolyses protein, will not act on starch. Each enzyme acts optimally at a certain pH, e.g.,
amylase acts only in alkaline medium.
      Some enzymes need another group, known as a coenzyme, to be attached to it to aid their
function. For example, B-vitamin serve as coenzymes in the reactions, which release energy from
glucose. In enzyme reactions, mineral elements are essential as cofactors. Thus normal body metabolism
is dependent on the presence of appropriate enzymes, coenzymes and cofactors specific to each
reaction.
      The digestive enzymes are only one group of a large number that are essential to regulate body
processes. Other enzymes are present in various tissues of the body and help in the utilisation of food
that has been absorbed.
Carbohydrates
     The digestion process begins with chewing the food in the mouth. The enzyme ptyalin (salivary
amylase) starts the digestion of starch in the mouth. It hydrolyses starch to dextrins, isomaltose and
maltose in neutral or alkaline pH in the mouth. The food tastes sweet due to these products of hydrolysis.
The activity of amylase continues in its movement from the mouth to the upper part of the stomach.
But as soon as the food mass comes in contact with hydrochloric acid secreted there, this action
ceases. Very little digestion of carbohydrate occurs in the stomach as the pH is unfavourable.
16                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      The food mixed with gastric juice forms a semi-fluid mass called chyme. It takes about three to
five hours to form chyme. Small portion of chyme are released through the pyloric sphincter into the
duodenum, the first part of the small intestine.
      The small intestine is so named because of the small diameter of its tube. It is about 20 ft long.
Most of the digestive activity takes place in its three compartments namely the duodenum, the jejunum
and ileum.
      Carbohydrate digestion occurs almost completely in the small intestine, mainly in the duodenum.
Pancreatic amylase breaks starches into maltose and dextrins. The maltase from mucosal cells
breaks down maltose to glucose. The brush border, on the surface of the epithelial cells lining the
intestines, is the site of this enzyme action.
      The enzymes sucrase, lactase, maltase, and isomaltase, found on the outer cell membranes of
the intestines, act on the sugars sucrose, lactose, maltose and isomaltose respectively. The
monosaccharides formed—glucose, galactose and fructose—pass through the mucosal cell and via the
capillary into the blood stream. These are carried to the liver by the portal vein.

                              Table 2.1: Enzymatic Reactions in Digestion

       Place of                                                                        Products of
                         Enzyme             Optimum pH          Substrate
        Action                                                                          Reaction

      Mouth          Salivary amylase         7.0              Cooked starch        Dextrins, maltose
                     (Ptyalin)
      Stomach        Pepsin (protease)        2.0              Proteins             Polypeptides
                     Rennin                   6.0–6.5          Milk, casein         Calcium caseinate
                     Lipase                   7.0              Emulsified fats      Fatty acids, glycerol
      Small          Pancreatic Juice
      Intestine      Trypsin (Protease)       8.0–9.0          Proteins             Polypeptides,
                                                                                    some amino-acids
                     Lipase                   7.0              Fats                 Di and mono-
                                                                                    glycerides, fatty
                                                                                    acids, glycerol
                     Amylase                  7.1              Starch               Maltose
                     Intestinal Juice
                     Peptidases               8.0              Peptones,            Amino acids
                     (Erepsin)                                 Polypeptides
                     Sucrase                  5.0–7.0          Sucrose              Glucose, fructose
                     Maltose                  6.7–7.2          Maltose              Glucose
                                                                                    (2 molecules)
                     Lactase                  5.4–6.0          Lactose              Glucose, galactose

1. pH is expressed as the negative logarithm of ‘hydrogen ion concentration’. The pH of water is 7; the acids
have pH less than 7 and alkalies have pH above 7.

     Some glucose is stored in the liver and muscles as glycogen, the rest is transported to tissues to
be used for their activities. Fructose and galactose are converted to glucose in the liver.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                           17

      Cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin and other forms of carbohydrate, which are collectively known as
fibre, are not split by human amylases. These are excreted in the faeces.
Proteins
      Digestion of proteins starts in the stomach, which serves as a storehouse, where some protein
hydrolysis begins. Milk is clotted by a special enzyme rennin and acid is added.
      Gastric juice, which is secreted by the stomach, contains hydrochloric acid, pepsin, rennin,
mucin and other substances.
      Hydrochloric acid has several important functions: (1) it swells the proteins, thus increasing their
surface area for enzyme action, (2) it converts the inactive pepsinogen to the enzyme pepsin, (3) it
provides the acid medium necessary for the action of pepsin, (4) it provides acidic pH for solution of
calcium and iron salts, (5) it reduces or destroys the activity of many pathogens (harmful bacteria)
present in the food.
      Pepsin is the only proteolytic enzyme, which is able to digest collagen, the main protein in connective
tissue. Pepsin, a protease in the gastric juice, splits proteins to polypeptides. It also digests the milk
curds formed by the enzyme rennin. The contribution of the stomach to the total process of protein
digestion is small, as most protein digestion occurs in the duodenum.
      As soon as the chyme enters the duodenum, it stimulates the intestinal mucosa to release an
enzyme enterokinase, which converts inactive trypsinogen into active trypsin. Trypsin activates
other proteolytic enzymes—chymotrypsin and carboxypolypeptidases. These enzymes breakdown
intact protein and with the help of peptidases continue the breakdown until small polypeptides and
amino acids are formed. The last phase of protein digestion also occurs in brush border, in which
peptidases hydrolyse di- and tri-peptides into constituent amino acids. But some intact peptides do
escape hydrolysis and enter the portal circulation.
      The amino acids released are absorbed via distinct active transport systems. Absorbed amino
acids and peptides are transported via the portal vein to the liver to be released into the general circulation.
      By the time it reaches the jejunum, almost all the protein is absorbed. Only one per cent of
digested protein is excreted in the faeces.
      Some amino acids, which remain in the epithelial cells, are used in the synthesis of new cells and
intestinal enzymes. The endogenous protein released internally (by breaking down of epithelial cells and
intestinal secretions) is digested and absorbed from the small intestine along with that ingested in the
diet.
Lipids
       The stomach lipase does act on emulsified fats in milk, cream, butter and egg yolk, but most of
the hydrolysis of fats takes place in the small intestine.
       As soon as the food enters the duodenum, the gall bladder releases some bile and the pancreas
secrete enzyme-rich juices. These fluids enter the duodenum through a common duct. Bile is a secretion
composed of bile acids, bile pigments, cholesterol, lecithin and many other compounds. About a liter of
bile is secreted daily due to the stimulus of food in the duodenum.
       The bile, which is manufactured by the liver, helps to
         • emulsify fat particles, which increases surface area and improves enzyme action.
         • neutralise the acid chyme and provide the alkaline pH necessary for the action of the intestinal
            enzymes.
18                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       The pancreatic juices contain trypsin, lipase and amylase, which act upon all components of
foods. Thus proteins are broken down by trypsin into amino acids. Large sugar molecules are changed
to simple sugars by action of amylase and lipase acts on glycerides and reduces these to fatty acid and
glycerol.
       The products of fat digestion inhibit the digestion process. The digested meal must be removed
from the duodenum over a period of time, to permit digestion to proceed. Hence a fatty meal may
remain up to four hours or more in the stomach. Thus there is a feeling of satiation after a fatty meal.
       Micelles, a combination of free fatty acids, monoglycerides and bile salts, facilitate the passage
of lipids through the aqueous environment of the intestinal lumen to the brush border. The bile salts are
then released from the lipid complex and return 3 to 15 times to carry more lipids across the membrane,
depending on the amount of food ingested.
       The fatty acids and monoglycerides are reassembled into new triglycerides in the mucosal cell.
Chylomicrons are formed by surrounding a combination of triglycerides, cholesterol, and phospholipids
with a beta-lipoprotein coat. Chylomicrons are transported by lymphatic vessels into the blood stream
and further on to the liver. The triglycerides are transported to adipose tissue for metabolism and
storage.
       Cholesterol is hydrolysed by pancreatic cholesterol esterase from ester form and absorbed in
the same manner as lipids.
       The fat soluble vitamins A, D, E and K are also absorbed in a similar fashion. Some forms of the
vitamins A, E and K and carotene do not need bile acids for their absorption.
       Normally 97 per cent of ingested fat is absorbed into lymph vessels. Fatty acids of 10 carbons or
less, due to shorter length and increased solubility, do not need bile salts and micelle formation for their
absorption and can be absorbed directly into the mucosal cell. From the mucosal cell these acids go
directly via the portal vein to the liver, without esterification.
       This is clinically a very useful quality of medium-chain fatty acids. Those patients, who cannot
metabolise usual long-chain fatty acids in dietary fat, due to lack of bile salts or some other problem,
can be fed triglycerides of medium-chain fatty acids (C8 and C10). These can be utilised directly.
       The digestive process is also aided by friendly bacteria which live in the intestinal tract. They help
in hydrolysing food and manufacture some of the nutrients (e.g., vitamin K, folic acid and some B-
complex vitamins).
Other Nutrients
      Vitamins and water pass unchanged from the small intestine into blood by passive diffusion.
      Mineral absorption, which is more complex, occurs in three stages. In the first stage, chemical
reactions occur in the stomach and intestines, which are affected by the pH of the mix. In the second
stage, these are carried across the membrane into intestinal mucosal cell. In the third stage, minerals
are transported into the blood stream or are bound within the cell.
      Important interactions occur between minerals in the gastrointestinal tract, which affect the
amount that is absorbed.
      There is simultaneous absorption of vitamins, minerals and fluids through the intestinal mucosa.
About 8 liters of fluids move to and from across the membrane of the gut to keep the nutrients in
solution. The current understanding of the sites and routes of absorption of nutrients is depicted in
Figure 2.3.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                     19




                   Figure 2.3: Gastrointestinal tract-sites of secretions and absorption.

Factors Affecting Digestion
    Several factors affect the digestion process. These include:
     1. Psychological factors, which play an important role in food acceptance, ingestion and digestion.
        If one likes the sight, smell and taste of food, it increases secretions of saliva, stomach juices
        and motility of gastrointestinal tract. Even the thought of food increases these secretions.
        On the other hand, if these are not liked, it depresses the secretions.
     2. Generally well cooked foods are more digestible than raw foods.
     3. Sound teeth to bite, cut and tear food into smaller pieces helps digestion, absence of molars,
        incisors and/or canine teeth affects the person’s ability to grind the food adversely and hence
        digestion is poor.
20                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       4. Sufficient supply of water to dilute the food, permits effective movement through the digestive
          tract and increases the surface area for efficient enzymatic breakdown.
       5. Sufficient bulk (fibre) helps to maintain normal forward movement.
       6. Normal secretion of enzymes, bile, hydrochloric acid aids the chemical splitting of food
          components to small absorbable units.
       7. The presence of friendly bacteria in the intestinal tract helps digestion.
       8. Relaxation of body permits the processes involved in digestion to occur normally. Any
          psychological stress, which makes a person tense, interferes with the digestive process by
          upsetting the occurrence of the normal secretions mentioned above.

Role of Large Intestine
      Large intestine consists of cecum, colon, rectum and the canal and is about 5 feet long.
      About 500 to 1,000 ml of water in the chyme enters the colon each day. Most of it is absorbed
and only 50 to 200 ml is excreted in the faeces. Since the colonic contents move forward very slowly,
most of the nutritionally valuable matter is absorbed.
      The large amounts of mucus secretion by the mucosa of large intestine protects the intestinal
walls from the adverse effects of bacterial and other action. The mucus also helps to hold the faeces
together. The neutralisation of acidic products of bacterial action is ensured by the action of bicarbonate
ions secreted in exchange for absorbed chloride ions.
Absorption and Transportation
       Absorption is the process of sucking up the nutrients in the body. Most of the absorption takes
place in the small intestine. Absorption of food from the digestive tract into the blood and lymph takes
place after the digested food is moved forward by peristaltic waves (muscular contraction and relaxation)
into the small intestine. These peristaltic waves push the food against the absorbing surface of the
intestinal wall. The intestinal wall is lined with four to five million tiny finger-like projections called villi
(see Figure 2.4.). The cells which cover villi permit the absorption of final products of digestion—
small molecules of sugars, amino acids and fat products and water, into the vessels that carry away the
blood and lymph. The large area of these villi promote efficient absorption of all nutrients. Ordinarily a
great deal of time is permitted for the absorptive process because the digested material must traverse
the entire length of the intestine a distance of about 20 ft.
       Besides the shape and size of intestinal wall, other factors affect absorption of the digested food.
For example, bile favours absorption of fats, calcium can be absorbed in the presence of vitamin D and
vitamin B12 can be absorbed only in the presence of an intrinsic factor in the gastric juice.
       The intestine, which is a semipermeable membrane, is highly selective and permits the passage of
nutrients only under certain special conditions. Thus absorption is affected by concentrations of the
nutrients in the blood. A high concentration in the blood stream may allow less absorption of vitamins
and minerals than would be permitted at a time when the blood level of these nutrients is low.
       The sugars, amino acids, water-soluble vitamins, minerals salts and possibly some of the fat
products are absorbed directly into the blood stream through the intestinal wall and are carried to the
liver. The remainder of the end products of fat digestion and the fat soluble vitamins enter into the
lymph system.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                    21

      Individuals in normal health may vary in their capacity to absorb even fully hydrolysed foods. The
recommended daily dietary allowances and the daily food guide provide quantities of nutrients generally
sufficient to cover the needs of individuals with normal variations in capacities to digest and absorb
nutrients.

                              Enlarged villi, showing
                              “brush border” of microvilli
                                                             Muscularis mucosae

                                                                    Mucosal folds
                                                                      (valvulae
                                                                    conniventes)

                                                                        Villi



                                  Circular muscle layer


                                  Longitudinal muscle

                                           Outer serosa



                       Figure 2.4: Intestinal wall—mucosal folds, villi and microvilli.


Utilisation of Nutrients in the Body
       Metabolism of all nutrients occurs within the cells of our body. The final oxidation of nutrients
into carbon dioxide and water occurs in the mitochondria. About 40 per cent of the energy released is
used to synthesise ATP, the remainder is released as heat.
       The ATP formed provides energy for the synthetic reactions in the cell. Fatty acid breakdown
also occurs in the mitochondria. The individual cells die and are replaced by new cells formed as part
of normal life processes.
       Glycolysis: Within the tissue cells, the first phase of glucose breakdown occurs in the cytoplasm.
This anaerobic stage of carbohydrate breakdown is known as glycolysis, in which glycogen or glucose
is converted to pyruvic acid. This is schematically presented in Figure 2.5.
       Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle (TCA) or Citric Acid Cycle: The intermediate compounds of
carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism are metabolised by a common final oxidative pathway. This
pathway is referred to as tricarboxylic acid cycle (TCA) or Citric acid cycle or Krebs cycle. The name
tricarboxylic indicates that it involves acids with three carboxyl (—COOH) groups; it is also called
Krebs cycle, as Krebs was the first scientist to have worked it out.
       In the mitochondria, pyruvic acid is converted to acetyl coenzyme A CoA before entering the
citric acid cycle.This complex reaction needs five enzymes and four coenzymes, four of which contain
four B vitamins (pantothenic acid, thiamin, niacin and riboflavin). The pantothenic acid is a part of coA
structure. The two carbon acetic acid combines with four carbon oxaloacetic acid forming citric acid
(6–C acid), with release of coenzyme A. This is the starting point of the citric acid cycle, which is
22                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


depicted in Figure 2.5. In this figure all steps at which hydrogen atoms, carbon dioxide or ATP are
formed are shown; a few intermediate substances are omitted.
      The cycle moves only clockwise from citric acid to oxaloacetic acid. In each round, one molecule
of acetic acid is degraded to carbon dioxide and water with synthesis of ATP. This ATP is the source of
energy for many synthetic reactions in the cells.




  Figure 2.5: Integration of carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism. The scheme indicates glycolysis,
                                citric acid cycle and their interconnections.

      The fats are broken down to fatty acids and glycerol. In the cytoplasm, glycerol is transformed
into triose phosphate, which can be oxidised to carbon dioxide and water via TCA cycle or it may be
used to form glucose.
      The fatty acids are oxidised to form two carbon units in the form of acetyl coA in a stepwise
manner. The acetyl coA enters the citric acid cycle and is metabolised as mentioned above. These
reactions occur in the mitochondria.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                    23

      Beta-oxidation of fatty acids: The fatty acid oxidation is referred to as beta-oxidation, because
fatty acid chain loses two carbon atoms at a time, which means the oxidation starts at the beta carbon.
When the first two carbons are separated, the new beta-carbon is attacked and so on. This may be
represented as follows:


                      R          R                    R              R               R

                     (CH2)3      (CH2)3               (CH2)3         CH2             CH2


                      CH2        C          O         COOH           C      O        COOH      etc.


                      CH2        CH2                  CH3            CH2             CH3


                      COOH       COOH                 COOH           COOH            COOH



                                     Figure 2.6: Beta-oxidisation of fatty acids.

      The two carbon unit combines with coenzyme A and forms acetyl coA which enters the citric
acid cycle. The beta oxidation of fatty acids can be shown as given in Figure 2.6. Acetyl coA may be
used to synthesise new fatty acids, cholesterol, etc. As noted before, acetyl coA is formed during
breakdown of both glucose and amino acids. Thus excess energy intake in any form (fats, carbohydrates,
proteins) is deposited as fat in the adipose tissue.
      Amino acids, the products of protein digestion are absorbed by the tissues and used to synthesise
tissue proteins, antibodies, some hormones and vitamins.
      Amino acids are very labile compounds, which can be converted to one another and into other
substances. The first step in this process is called deamination, the removal of amino group (—NH2).
The amino group may be transferred to a keto-acid to form amino acids, which are normally formed in
the body. Hence these amino acids are not essential to be supplied in the diet.
      Transamination refers to the transfer of amino groups from one compound to another. Thus L-
glutamic acid, loses NH2 to a keto acid, for example pyruvic acid, to form alanine, an amino acid.
Transamination reactions are catalysed by transaminases, which need coenzyme containing vitamin B.


                            COOH                                      COOH
                                                CH3                                  CH3
                            (CH2)2                                   (CH2)2
                                        +       C         O                       + CHNH2
                            CHNH2                                     C       O
                                                COOH                                 COOH
                            COOH                                      COOH
                       Glutamic acid        Pyruvic acid       Alpha-keto glutaric   Alanine
                                                                      acid



     Transaminases are present in all tissues, but heart, muscle, brain; kidney, liver and testes have
higher concentrations of the enzyme.
24                                                          Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Deamination occurs when the amino group of an amino acid is oxidatively removed by a special
dehydrogenase system to form a keto acid and ammonia. Thus glutamic acid is oxidised to form alpha-
keto glutaric acid and ammonia as shown below:

                         COOH                           COOH

                         (CH2)2                        (CH2)2
                                        1 O
                                       +—                                +   NH3
                                        2 2
                         CHNH2                          C       O

                         COOH                           COOH
                       Glutamic acid          Alpha-keto glutaric acid       Ammonia


      The enzyme required for this deamination reaction is amino acid oxidase, which needs a coenzyme
containing riboflavin. Liver is the site of most deamination reactions, but if needed, it can occur in the
kidneys also. All the deaminated parts of amino acids can enter the citric acid cycle as shown in Figure
2.5.
      Most of the nitrogen containing groups, split off from amino acids (80 to 90 per cent), are
converted to urea in the liver and excreted in the urine.
      Urea Formation: The ammonia formed in deamination is converted in the liver to urea. Urea is
the main nitrogenous product of amino acid metabolism. On a normal diet, urea forms 85 to 92 per cent
of total nitrogen and it is excreted in the urine. Other nitrogenous constituents of urine are uric acid,
ammonia and creatinine, which form a very small fraction of urinary nitrogen.
      The schematic formation of urea is given in Figure 2.7.




                                        Figure 2.7: Formation of urea.
Digestion, Absorption and Utilisation of Nutrients                                                  25

      The ammonia formed in deamination of amino acids combines with carbon dioxide yielding
compound to form carbamic acid. ATP is required as also Mg++ to form carbamyl phosphate, which
reacts with ornithine to form citrulline. The enol form of citrulline reacts with aspartic acid in the
presence of ATP to form an intermediate (argino-succinic acid) which gives arginine and fumaric acid.
The arginine is decomposed by arginase to urea and ornithine. The ornithine is ready to take up CO2 and
NH3 via carbamyl phosphate again.

Study Questions
       1.   Explain the following: atom, ion, compound, radioisotope, organic acid and synthesis.
       2.   List the enzymes involved in the digestion of food and the functions of each enzyme.
       3.   What are the functions of hydrochloric acid?
       4.   List the factors which are needed for normal digestion.
       5.   What are the coenzymes and cofactors needed in the citric acid cycle?
                                                                                  CHAPTER 3


 The Recommended Dietary Allowances for
                                         Nutrients


     Introduction
     Why were the Recommendations Set-up?
     General Principles of Deriving RDA
     How is RDA Derived?
     Reference Body Weights of Indians
     Reference Person
     Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians
     Uses of Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs)
     Limitations of RDA
     Study Questions




Introduction
      Each day we need a number of nutrients to enable our body to carry out its activities efficiently.
To determine what nutrients we need each day and how much, to keep us in good health, a lot of
research has been done. The results of these studies have been used to work out the nutritional
requirements of Indian people. After adding a factor of safety, the Recommended Dietary Allowances
(RDAs) for Indians have been set-up.
      An advisory committee of the Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) is responsible for the
setting up; review and revision of these RDAs. Let us understand why and how these RDAs were set-
up.

Why were the Recommendations Set-up?
      In a number of studies the harmful effects of nutrient deficiencies on the human body and its
functions were observed. These were so revealing that the League of Nations thought it necessary to
set-up a committee to review available experimental data and recommend daily dietary allowances for
each of the nutrients that were known at that time.
The Recommended Dietary Allowances for Nutrients                                                      27

      During the Second World War (1939–45), the military recruiting officers had to reject a number
of young men, who wanted to enlist, because they were underweight. Naturally the governments in
various countries were anxious to rectify this situation. Another related problem was the need to
estimate the amount of food to be sent to various army units. This led to the setting up of Recommended
Dietary Allowances (RDA) in number of countries between, 1940 and 1944. India was one of the first
countries to set-up Recommended Dietary Allowances in 1944. The desirable dietary intakes of energy,
protein, calcium, iron, vitamin A, thiamin, ascorbic acid and vitamin D were suggested in the RDAs
set-up in 1944.
      On the basis of newer research findings, these recommendations have been revised four times
and fifth revision is expected in the near future.
      In 1958, the recommendations for energy were revised. In 1968 and again in 1978 allowances of
all nutrients except energy were revised. In 1968, additional recommendations were made for four B
vitamins, namely riboflavin, nicotinic acid, folic acid and vitamin B12. In 1978, the requirements for a
one more B vitamin, pyridoxine (B6) were included.
      In making these recommendations, the ICMR committee was guided by the dietary allowances
suggested by Expert group of FAO and WHO and also by the results of studies carried out in India on
nutrient requirements.
      In the 1978 revision, the unit of energy joule, adopted by International Union of Sciences and
IUNS (International Union of Nutritional Sciences) has also been included.
      The 1978 revision was entitled Recommended Dietary Intake (RDI), to emphasise the intake of
nutrients. The word ‘recommended’ is used to emphasise that these values need to be revised periodically
on the basis of newer research data.
      The last revision was made in 1988. The important features of the 1988 revision are:
        • the revision of body weight standards for Indians
        • complete revision of energy requirements
        • definition of quantum and type of fat intakes
        • modification of RDAs of vitamin A and D
        • inclusion of several nutrients and dietary factors not considered earlier, such as fibre,
            electrolytes (sodium, potassium), magnesium, phosphorus, vitamin E and K, and
        • for the first time a provisional recommendation on trace elements was made.
      No substantial changes were made in the RDAs for protein, B-complex vitamins, iron and calcium.

General Principles of Deriving RDA
    A number of general principles are used to arrive at nutritional requirements of an individual or the
RDA for a population. These are:
      • Dietary intakes: This approach has been used to arrive at the energy needs of children.
         Energy intakes of normally growing children is used as the basis for RDA.
      • Growth: To define requirements in early infancy, the breast milk intake of healthy infants, or
         the requirement of any particular nutrient for satisfactory growth has been utilised.
      • Nutrient balance: As for a number of other nutrients, to arrive at the protein requirements,
         the minimum intake of nutrient for equilibrium (intake = output) in adults, and nutrient
         retention consistent with satisfactory growth in children, have been used widely.
28                                                                   Fundamentals of Foods and Nutrition

       • Obligatory loss of nutrients: is the minimal loss of the nutrient or its metabolic product
         through normal routes of elimination (viz., urine, faeces and sweat). It is determined on a
         diet devoid of or very low in the nutrient. For example, a protein-free diet in case of proteins.
         This information is used to determine the amount of nutrient to be consumed daily through
         the diet to replace the obligatory loss. In infants and children, growth requirements are
         added to the above maintenance requirements.
       • Factorial method: In this method, the needs for various functions are assessed separately
         and added up to assess the total daily requirements. This is the method used to arrive at total
         energy requirements.
       • Nutrient turnover: Data collected by studying turnover of certain nutrients in healthy
         persons, using isotopically labelled nutrients has been used to determine their requirements.
         Vitamin A, vitamin C, iron and vitamin B12 requirement have been measured in this manner.
       • Depletion and repletion studies: These have been used to determine the requirements of
         water-soluble vitamins. The vitamin status is measured by recording the levels of vitamin or
         its coenzyme in serum or tissue (e.g., erythrocytes, leucocytes). The requirements of ascorbic
         acid (vitamin C), thiamin, riboflavin, niacin and pyridoxine have been established using this
         approach. The subjects are first fed a diet very low in the nutrient being studied until the
         biochemical parameters reach a low level. After that feeding graded doses of the nutrient is
         studied. The level at which response increases rapidly indicates the level of requirement of
         the nutrient.

How is RDA Derived?
      RDA is derived on the basis of —
      (a) A knowledge of the requirement of nutrients for each physiological group.
      (b) It is based on nutrient requirement determined by one or more of the approaches listed
           above.
      (c) The RDA is computed after considering nutrient bioavailability from the diet.
      (d) It is presumed that the requirement of all other nutrients are met adequately. RDA is applicable
           only under this condition.
      (e) RDA is applicable only to a healthy population living under normal conditions.
      (f) The RDA is computed after considering individual variability.
      (g) In practice a level of intake corresponding to the Mean +2 standard deviations, which covers
           the requirements of 97.5 per cent of the population is chosen as RDA. This safe level
           approach is not used in the case of energy, as excess or inadequate intake is undesirable,
           only the average requirement of energy is defined as RDA.
      For certain nutrients, such as protein, iron, calcium, beta-carotene and vitamin B12, bioavailability
from the diet is a critical factor.
      For proteins, the essential amino acid mix in the diet, which decides the quality of protein is
important. In the normal Indian diet, protein is derived from several sources, such as cereals, dals and
legumes, milk and milk products and a variety of vegetables. Occasionally fish, eggs and other flesh
foods are included according to one’s taste and resources. Hence the quality tends to be satisfactory,
due to mutual supplementation of individual proteins.
      In case of iron, while the total intake may be satisfactory, absorption from foods is a critical
factor. Absorption is affected by the relative presence of both absorption promotors, (acid medium,
The Recommended Dietary Allowances for Nutrients                                                       29

e.g., ascorbic and other acids) and absorption inhibitors (phytates, tannins, oxalate, etc.). In the diets
habitually consumed in India, which are high in inhibitors and low in promotors, iron absorption is only
2 to 5 per cent.
       In the case of vitamin A, niacin and others, provitamins present in foods, are converted to the
respective vitamins in the body. The RDA for vitamin A and niacin are defined after considering these
factors.

Reference Body Weights of Indians
      The nutrient needs vary with age and weight of an individual. Body weights and heights of
children reflect their state of health and growth rate, while adult weight and height represent what can
be attained by an individual with normal growth. Anthropometric measurements of Indian children up
to 14 years from well-to-do groups have shown that they grow at rates similar to those of children in
the developed countries. Desirable heights and weights of both children and adults (not the prevailing
ones) are considered in recommending nutrient intakes as the RDA is intended for a healthy and well-
nourished population.
      In the 1978 revision of RDA, the body weights of well-to-do Indian children and adolescents
were used to compute their nutritional needs. But for adults, a reference body weight of 55 kg for men
and 45 kg for women have been used since 1944. The weights of adults do not match those of well
nourished adolescents. Secondly with current heights of 163 cm and 151 cm of Indian adult men and
women, the corresponding expected body weights would be higher than the reference weights of 55
and 45 kg used so far. Hence the ICMR committee recommended that the reference weights for Indian
man and woman used for RDA be increased to 60 kg and 50 kg respectively.


            Table 3.1: Reference Body Weights of Indians of Different Age Groups1

                                                                       Weight
                                                                       (in Kg)
                                   Age (Years)
                                                            Male                 Female

             Infants                   0–0.5                 5.4                  5.4
                                      0.5–1.0                8.6                  8.6
             Children                     1–3               12.6                 11.8
                                          4–6               19.2                 18.7
                                          7–9                27.0                26.7
                                       10–12                 35.5                37.9

             Adolescents               13–15                 47.9                46.7
                                       16–18                 57.3                49.9
             Adults                    20–50                 60.0                50.0

1. RDA for Indians, ICMR, 1990, page 9.
30                                                                 Fundamentals of Foods and Nutrition


Reference Person
      Reference body weights (kg) of Indians of different age groups are given in Table 3.1.
Our nutrient needs vary with the size and age of our body. Therefore an individual of given age and size
has been designated as a reference. The reference man and reference woman in the Indian RDA have
been defined as–
                      Reference Woman         Age 20–39 years and weight 50 kg
                      Reference Man           Age 20–39 years and weight 60 kg
      Reference woman is healthy. She may be engaged in 8 hours of moderately active work, in light
industry or in general household work. Apart from 8 hours in bed, she spends 4 to 6 hours in light
leisure activities and 2 hours in active household work, recreation or walking.
      Reference man is healthy, free from disease and fit for work. He is employed in moderately
active occupation for 8 hours, spends 8 hours in bed, 4 to 6 hours in leisure activities, sitting and
moving about and 2 hours in active recreation, walking or household duties.

Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians
      The recommended dietary allowances for nutrients for an adult reference woman and man are
given in Table 3.2. The table contains RDAs for:
                  Energy and Protein
                  Minerals—Calcium and Iron
                  Water-Soluble Vitamins—C and six of the B-group
                  Fat-Soluble Vitamins—A, E and K
       Besides these, there are other nutrients, which are required by our body for normal function. It
is reassuring to know that on an average, a diet, which provides a sufficient amount of the above
nutrients, will meet the need for these other nutrients also. Please remember that a liberal margin of
safety is provided in the recommended dietary intakes to cover differences in needs of healthy persons.
      As you can see from Table 3.2, only two nutrients are needed in large amounts—energy and
proteins. The RDA for energy is about 40 kcal per kg for a sedentary man and 37 kcal per kg body
weight for a sedentary woman. Moderately active man’s RDA is 48 kcal per kg and woman’s 40 kcal
per kg body weight. The RDA of a man engaged in heavy activity is 63 kcal and a woman 58 kcal per
kg body weight. Thus knowing your body weight and the type of work you do, you can estimate your
energy needs.
      The RDA for protein is based on 1 g per kg body weight. It does not vary with activity.
      The RDA for minerals is much less, calcium is 400 mg per day for both man and woman, while
iron is only 28 to 30 milligrammes per day. As you know, a milligramme is one thousandth part of a
gramme. An adult woman needs more iron than a man, to make up for the periodic loss of iron in
menstruation.
      The five water-soluble vitamins, namely thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine and ascorbic acid,
are needed in very small amounts and their RDAs are expressed in milligrammes. The remaining two B-
vitamins, folic acid and vitamin B12 are needed in very minute amounts and hence their RDA are
expressed in microgrammes (mcg). A microgramme is one-millionth part of a gramme. The amount of
B-Vitamins needed is related to the total energy needs and therefore varies with the RDA for energy. So
you notice that an adult man requires slightly higher amounts of these vitamins than an adult woman.
                                                                                                                                                         The Recommended Dietary Allowances for Nutrients
                                                        Table 3.2: RDA for Indians (1989)1

Group Particulars          Body  Net       Protein   Fat   Calcium Iron        Vit.A       Thiamin Ribo- Nicotinic Pyri- Ascor- Folic Vit.B12
                            Wt energy        g/d     g/d    mg/d   mg/d Retinol β -carotene mg/d flavin    acid    doxin bic acid acid µg/ d
                            kg  kcal/d                                       µg/ d                 mg/d   mg/d     mg/d mg/d µg/ d

Man     Sedentary Work           2425                                                         1.2      1.4     16 
        Moderate Work      60    2875      60      20      400      28      600     2400      1.4      1.6     18      2.0       40   100         1
        Heavy Work               3800                                                         1.6      1.9     21 
Woman Sedentary Work             1875                                                         0.9      1.1     12 
        Moderate Work      50    2225      50      20      400      30      600     2400      1.1      1.3     14      2.0       40   100         1
        Heavy Work               2925                                                         1.2      1.5     16 
        Pregnant woman      50    +300      +15      30     1000      38      600     2400     +0.2     +0.2     +2       2.5       40   400         1
        Lactation
        0–6 months                 +550      +25     45     1000      30      950     3800     +0.3     +0.3      +4      2.5       80   150     1.5
        6–12 months        50      +400      +18                                               +0.2     +0.2      +3
Infants 0–6 months         5.4    118/kg   2.05/kg           500                             55 µg/kg 65 µg/kg 710µg/kg   0.1            25     0.2
         6–12 monhs         8.6   98/kg    1.65/kg                            350     1200 50 µg/kg 60 µg/kg 650 µg/kg    0.4 
                                                                                                                                   25
Children 1–3 years         12.2   1240        22     25      400      12      400            0.6      0.7      8                        30   0.2-1.0
                                                                                     1600                               0.9       40
         4–6 years         19.0   1690        30                      18      400            0.9      1.0     11                        40
         7–9 years         26.9   1950        41                      26      600     2400    1.0      1.2      13        1.6            60
 Boys    10–12 years       35.4   2190        54     22      600      34                     1.1      1.3     15              
 Girls   10–12 years       31.5   1970        57                      19 
                                                                             600     2400
                                                                                              1.0      1.2     13 
                                                                                                                         1.6      40   70    0.2–1.0
 Boys    13–15 years       47.8   2450        70     22      600      41     600     2400    1.2      1.5     16 
                                                                                                                        2.0       40   100   0.2–1.0
 Girls   13–15 years       46.7   2060        65                      28                     1.0      1.2     14 
 Boys    16–18 years       57.1   2640        78     22      500      50    600     2400    1.3      1.6     17       2.0       40   100   0.2–1.0
 Girls   16–18 years       49.9   2060        63                      30                     1.0      1.2     14 

Narasingha Rao B.S., Y.G. Deosthale and K.C. Pant, Nutrient Composition of Indian Foods, p. 94, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad-500007,
India, 1989.




                                                                                                                                                         31
32                                                                   Fundamentals of Foods and Nutrition

      The amount of fat-soluble vitamin A, its precursor, beta-carotene and vitamin D required by us is
very minute and is expressed in microgrammes (1 microgramme (mcg) = one millionth of a gramme.)
The recommendation for vitamin D is given in International Units (IU) and IU = 0.025 mcg.
      It is natural that nutrient needs vary with age, activity and physiological status such as pregnancy
and lactation. Our physical activity is normally dependent on our occupation or profession. The variation
in energy needs with age, physiological status and occupation is illustrated in Figure 3.1.

Use of Recommended Dietary Allowances (RDAs)
     The recommended dietary allowances for nutrients have a number of practical uses. These are :
      1. To enable government to predict food needs of the population.
      2. To provide basis for food distribution quota.
      3. To guide agricultural planning policy.
      4. To guide policy of food export and import.
      5. To guide planning of nutritionally adequate diets for inmates of large catering establishments
         such as hospitals, hostels, hotels, army canteens, etc.
      6. To evaluate the findings of food consumption surveys of population groups.




             Age – 7-8 months      10 years      25 years       Pregnant     Moderate Activity
             Calories – 785        1970          1875           2275         2225
             Protein – 11g         57 g          50 g           65 g         50 g
             Body Weight – 8 kg    31 kg         50 kg          60 kg        50 kg


                  Figure 3.1: Energy and protein needs vary with age and occupation.

       In practical nutrition classes, the recommended dietary allowances are often used for planning or
checking the adequacy of food intake of individuals, or of a given diet plan. You have to be cautious in
the use of recommended allowances of nutrients in this manner, because you must consider the body
size of the individual, which may differ from that of the reference person.
       Secondly a diet that provides the recommended amounts of nutrients may be adequate; a diet
which does not meet these may not be a poor one since there is a liberal margin of safety provided in
the RDAs. The manner in which you can evaluate the diets of individuals for adequacy will be discussed
in a later chapter.
The Recommended Dietary Allowances for Nutrients                                                      33


Limitations of RDAs
     It is important to note the limitations in the use of RDAs. These are:
     (a) RDAs are estimates of intakes. of nutrients, which population groups need to consume to
            meet the physiological needs of all persons in that group.
     (b) RDAs are not meant to be used as standards to determine nutrient adequacy of an individual’s
            intake.
     (c) It is implied that intake of nutrients at RDA level will involve very little risk of inadequacy.
     (d) Individuals, whose intake of nutrients is below that given as RDA are not necessarily at risk
            of deficiency, since many individuals in a population may have requirements well below the
            RDA.

Study Questions
      1.   Why are recommended allowances set-up?
      2.   What are the guiding principles usded to derive RDAs?
      3.   What is a reference man?
      4.   What are recommended dietary allowances?
      5.   How can recommended allowances be used?
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
      PART - II
The Nutrients and Energy
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                                                                                  CHAPTER 4


                                  Carbohydrates


     Introduction
     Nature, Composition and Classification
     Properties
     Functions
     Food Sources
     Utilisation in the Body
     Regulation of Blood Sugar
     Recommended Dietary Allowances
     Clinical Problems
     Dietary Fibre
         Classification and Sources
         Physiological Properties
         Role in Health and Disease
         Some Problems Due to High Fibre Diets
     Sugar Substitutes
     Study Questions



Introduction
      In this chapter we will consider carbohydrates, the primary fuel for our body. Can you imagine a
meal without rice, chapati or some other cereal preparation? No. Rice, wheat and other grains are an
important part of each of our meal everyday. Thus cereals are our staple food. In the Indian dietary,
about 65 to 80 per cent energy is provided by carbohydrates.
      There are practical reasons for the universal use of carbohydrates in diets. The yield of cereals,
the primary source of carbohydrates, is high per unit area. Therefore, they are widely available and are
an economic source of energy. They are easily packed and have a long shelf-life in dry storage. They
are mild flavoured and combine well with other foods. Carbohydrate foods are easy to prepare.
      Let us consider the nature, composition, properties, functions, food sources, utilisation,
requirement, and effect of deficiency of carbohydrates.
38                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Nature, Composition and Classification
      Carbohydrates are synthesised by all green plants using solar energy, water from the soil and
carbon dioxide from the air. This complex process is called photosynthesis, the prefix photo indicates
the importance of sunlight in this process. Plants are thus the primary source of food in the world.
      Carbohydrates contain carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. The suffix hydrate indicates that water and
oxygen occur in the same proportion as in water.
      The members of the simplest class of carbohydrates have a single unit—monosaccharide (mono
or one, saccharide or sugar containing). Glucose is an example of this class. The disaccharides contain
two sugars linked together to form a chain. Cane or beet sugar (sucrose), milk sugar (lactose), and
maltose (malt sugar) are members of this class. Carbohydrates made up, of long chains of sugars are
called polysaccharides (poly—many). Among them are starch, dextrins, glycogen, cellulose,
hemicelluloses, pectins, plant gums and mucilages. Table 4.1 presents the types and sources of
carbohydrates occurring in nature.
                         Table 4.1: Forms and Sources of Carbohydrates

         Carbohydrates                    Main Food Sources                          Remarks

         Polysaccharides
         Cellulose and hemicelluloses     Stalks and leaves of vegetables            Indigestible
                                          Outer covering of seeds                    Indigestible
         Pectins                          Fruits                                     Indigestible
         Gums and mucilages               Plant secretions & seed exudates           Indigestible
         Starch and dextrins              Grains, legumes & tubers                   Digestible
         Glycogen                         Meats and scafood                          Digestible
         Disaccharides
         Sucrose                          Cane and beet sugar, mollasses             Digestible
         Lactose                          Milk and milk products                     Digestible
         Maltose                          Malt products, some breakfast cereals      Digestible
         Monosaccharides
         Glucose                          Fruits, honey, corn syrup                  Digestible
         Fructose                         Fruits, honey                              Digestible
         Galactose                        Milk                                       Digestible

      Simple carbohydrates include mono- and disaccharides. These are small molecules, which dissolve
in water and are absorbed very quickly in the body. In contrast, starches and dietary fibres are very
large, complex molecules, containing several hundred small sugar units and are absorbed slowly.
Therefore polysaccharides are referred to as complex carbohydrates. Individual members of each of
these classes (starch, pectins, gums, mucilages, cellulose, hemicelluloses, lignin) differ in the type of
small units they contain and in the way these units are united in the molecule.
      Glucose, the most common monosaccharide, is present in honey, fruits and corn syrup. After
absorption of food it is transported through blood and hence is present in blood as an easily available
source of energy.
Carbohydrates                                                                                          39

      Sucrose is the ordinary sugar available in the grocery store and used in beverages and food
preparations as a sweetener. As you can note from the table, it is mainly manufactured from cane sugar
in the tropics and sugar beets in the temperate regions. It is also present in molasses, honey, fruits and
vegetables. Sucrose is hydrolysed to a mixture of equal amounts of glucose and fructose by action on
digestive enzymes or when boiled with acid (such as citric acid from fruits). This mixture of glucose
and fructose is called invert sugar and it is used in preparation of candies and icings.
      Maltose does not occur in free form in nature. It is formed during sprouting of grains or in
digestion of starch by action of enzymes. It contains two glucose molecules. Lactose is the sugar in
milk. It yields glucose and galactose on hydrolysis by lactase. It is less soluble than sucrose and
maltose and less sweet than glucose. Persons, who have lactase insufficiency, cannot utilise lactose
and hence have to restrict their intake of milk and milk products. Children, who are born without the
liver enzyme lactase, cannot digest milk and have to be fed soya milk instead.
      Starch is found in cereal grains, legumes and in tubers. Glycogen is found in meats and seafood.
These are digestible polysaccharides.
      Cellulose and hemicelluloses, pectins, gums and mucilages are indigestible polysaccharides.
Celluloses are found in stalks and leaves of vegetables and outer coverings of seeds. Pectins are present
in fruits and gums and mucilages are part of plant exudates and seeds.

Properties
       Sugars are soluble in water, are sweet to taste and are hygroscopic (absorb water from the
atmosphere). As they are hygroscopic, they need to be stored in air tight containers. Sugars vary in
their solubility in water; sucrose is more soluble than glucose. Carbohydrates, can be ranked according
to their sweetness. Fructose is the sweetest and the most soluble sugar. It is followed by sucrose,
glucose, dextrin and lactose. The relative sweetness of sugars is indicated in Table 4.2.
                           Table 4.2: Comparative Sweetness of Sugars

                             Sugar                               Sweetness Value

                             Fructose                                   173

                             Invert sugar                               130

                             Sucrose                                    100

                             Glucose                                    74

                             Galactose                                  32

                             Maltose                                    32

                             Lactose                                    16

      Starches are not sweet, but bland in flavour. Tender corn is sweet, as it matures it becomes less
sweet as sugars are converted to starch. Raw fruits contain starch, which changes to sugars during
the ripening process with development of sweet taste.
40                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Functions
     Carbohydrates have many important functions in the body:
      1. The primary function of carbohydrates in the body is to supply energy. Each gramme of
         carbohydrate, as starch or sugar, provides 4 kcal/g. Carbohydrates are a source of readily
         available energy, which is needed for physical activities as also the work of the body cells.
         The brain and the central nervous system are dependent on the constant supply of glucose
         from the blood to meet their energy needs.
      2. Carbohydrates act also as reserve fuel supply in the form of glycogen, stored in muscles
         and liver. The total amount of glycogen in the body is over 300g. But it must be maintained
         by regular intake of carbohydrates at frequent intervals, so that the breakdown of fat and
         protein tissue is prevented.
      3. Carbohydrates serve other special functions in the body. Carbohydrates provide chemical
         framework, which combine with the nitrogen to synthesise non-essential amino acids in the
         body.
      4. Carbohydrates and their derivatives work as precursors of important metabolic compounds.
         These include nucleic acids, the matrix of connective tissue and galactosides of nerve tissue.
      5. Lactose, the milk sugar, provides galactose needed for brain development. It aids absorption
         of calcium and phosphorus, thus helping bone growth and maintenance.
      6. Lactose forms lactic acid in the intestinal track due to the action of the bacteria (lactobacilli)
         present there. These lactobacilli synthesise some of the B-complex vitamins. It aids, bacteria
         (lactobacilli) present to suppress the activities of putrefactive bacteria and protects us from
         their undesirable effects.
      7. Carbohydrates are an important part of some compounds, which increase our resistance to
         infection (immunopolysaccharides). Ribose, a five carbon sugar, is an essential part of DNA
         and RNA. Carbohydrates are a part of important compounds, which are components of
         nervous tissue (galactolipid), heart valve, cartilage, bone and skin (chondroitin sulfate).
      8. Carbohydrates are needed for ensuring complete normal metabolism of fats, thus preventing
         acidosis.
      9. Carbohydrates are needed to prevent dehydration. A low carbohydrate diet causes loss of
         water from tissues as also electrolytes (especially sodium and potassium) in the urine and
         can lead to involuntary dehydration.
     10. Dietary fibre acts like a sponge and absorbs water. It helps smooth movement of food waste
         through the digestive tract and the soft, bulky stools are comfortably eliminated.

Food Sources
      Carbohydrates are synthesised by plants and occur in several forms. Starch is found in plant
seeds (cereals and legumes), roots and tubers. These foods are the primary energy sources in the
human dietary (Table 4.3).
      The intake of complex carbohydrate in the form of cereals, dals and legumes, in normal Indian
dietary is sufficient. Cereals, which are the staple food in the Indian dietary, contribute major part of the
energy and proteins, and some minerals and vitamins. Dals and legumes provide significant amounts of
proteins, iron and B-vitamins, in addition to energy. Potatoes, yams, jackfruit are good source of starch
Carbohydrates                                                                                         41

in the diet. Vegetables and fruits provide dietary fibre, minerals and vitamins. Milk is the only animal
food, which is the source of a very important sugar—lactose—in the diet.
      Sugars are found in fruits; the percentage is about three in melons, ten in citrus fruits and guava
and seventeen in mango. Thus fruits are an excellent snack food as they are a dilute source of quick
energy and other nutrients.
      Sugars found in plant sap or juice (sugarcane and beetroot) is extracted to give pure 100 per cent
sugar. It must be used judiciously, as it provides only energy. The intake of foods high in added sugars,
such as soft drinks, syrups and sweets needs to be controlled to avoid obesity.
                              Tabe 4.3: Carbohydrate Content of Foods

                                                        Carbohydrate
                Food                                                             Calories/unit
                                               g/100g               g/unit

         Rice, rice flakes, rawa,               75–78                  19              86–88
         vermicelli, etc.
         Wheat flour (atta), jowar              69–72               17–18              82–87
         Dals,                                  58–60                  15              84–87
         Tapioca or cassava                       38                   19                80
         Banana*                                  27                   22                95
         potato, colocasia, chiku, peas,        16–22               8–11               40–49
         yam, jackfruit
         Mango                                    17                   9                 37
         Orange, guava, pear, apple,             7–13                3–6               24–30
         carrot, onion, clusterbeans
         Leafy and other vegetables              1–4                 1–2                6–17
         Milk                                     5                    7                 100
         Sugar                                   100                   5                 20

* One banana has about 80g edible portion

Utilisation in the Body
      Starch is partly hydrolysed by ptyalin (salivary amylase) in the mouth to dextrose and maltose.
Starch and dextrin are further hydrolysed to maltose by amylase in the small intestine. Maltose, sucrose
and lactose are further broken down to glucose, fructose and galactose (simple sugar units) by the
enzymes maltase, sucrase and lactase.
      The glucose formed by the digestion of the starch and sugar is absorbed mainly into the blood
through the walls of the intestine and carried to the liver. The glucose thus absorbed helps to maintain
the glucose level in blood and the glycogen stores in the muscle and the liver. Whenever we need
energy, the glycogen is broken down to glucose which is oxidised and the energy produced is used by
the body. Any excess glycogen is converted to fat.
42                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Regulation of Blood Sugar
     Liver glycogen is continually converted to glucose and diffuses into the blood to replace the blood
glucose used up by the tissues. Muscle glycogen is used for energy by the muscles. Only when muscle
glycogen is oxidised to lactic acid, the lactic acid is carried to liver and converted to glucose and
glycogen.
     In normal persons, the blood sugar level is maintained at a constant level, which is 70 to 100 mg
per 100 ml, under fasting conditions. A number of hormones regulate the reactions, and ensure the
maintenance of normal blood sugar level. These hormones are insulin, glucagon, epinephrine,
glucocorticoids, thyroxine and growth hormones.

Recommended Dietary Allowance
      A minimum of 100g carbohydrates are needed in the diet to ensure the efficient oxidation of fats.
Most diets supply more than this amount. If the carbohydrate foods are consumed in excess of the
body’s need, the excess is converted into fat and is stored as reserve. No daily allowance has been
fixed for carbohydrates. As it is the cheapest source of food energy, it supplies up to 80 per cent of the
calories in the low cost diets in India. If the proteins supply about 10 per cent of the calories, fat 20 per
cent, then carbohydrates must supply the remaining 70 per cent calories.

Clinical Problems
      Obesity: It is very easy to take sweets, mithais, candy, soft drinks, etc., in excess of one’s
needs. Most of these sweets contain a lot of fat also, which is a concentrated source of calories. When
the energy intake exceeds expenditure, the excess is deposited as fat. Over a period of time, overweight
and obesity can occur. Obesity is known to be a predisposing factor for a number of health problems.
      Dental caries: If sugar remains in contact with the teeth, it tends to lead to tooth decay. If it is
not checked, it may lead to dental caries. Chewy sweets tend to remain in contact with teeth for long
periods, unless children are taught to rinse their mouth thoroughly after eating candy, as also food.

Deficiency
      If less than required amount of carbohydrates is consumed the body first burns its own fat and
then its tissue proteins for heat and energy. To prevent this, daily diet must supply the required amount
of carbohydrates regularly.

Dietary Fibre
      Cellulose, hemicellulose and pectins which are components of the skins of fruits, coverings of
seeds and the structural parts of edible plants are usually referred to as ‘Fibre’. Cellulose is not soluble
in hot or cold water. pectins which occur in ripe fruits have the ability to absorb water and to from gels.
This property of pectins is made use of in the preparation of jams and jellies.
      The structural parts of plants, which are not digested by enzymes in the human intestinal tract are
known as dietary fibres.
      Classification and Sources: Dietary fibre includes:
       (i) Structural parts of plant cell walls (cellulose, hemicellulose and lignin), which are not soluble
Carbohydrates                                                                                                     43

           in water, are classed as insoluble fibre. Water insoluble fibres are found in whole wheat,
           wheat bran, seeds, nuts and vegetables.
      (ii) Viscous plant fibres are soluble in water. These include pectins, gums and mucilages. Soluble
           fibres are found in fruits, oat and barley, legumes and beans.
      Functions: The human body does not have enzymes capable of breaking down cellulose,
hemicellulose and pectins and so fibre is not digested in the body. However, in view of their ability to
absorb water, these indigestible substances serve a useful purpose in helping with the elimination of
intestinal wastes. They stimulate the peristalitic (rhythmic) movements of the gastrointestinal tract by
adding bulk to the intestinal contents.
      The insoluble fibre needs chewing and may improve mastication of food. Dietary fibre absorbs
water, swells and thus increases surface area of the mass. Thus there is increased contact between the
food mass and enzymes and hence digestion improves. There is also a feeling of fullness. The spongelike
swollen mass of fibre ensures smooth elimination of faeces.
      Fibre reduces transit time and binds some minerals such as calcium, iron, zinc, etc. Soluble fibre
binds bile acids and cholesterol and helps carry these out of the body. There is no recommended dietary
allowance for fibre. However, nutrition researchers and dieticians suggest that fibre intake be increased
to 25 grammes or more per day.


      50 g.   Guava, red gram tender                                                              2.6 to 3.1 g.

      50 g.   Cluster beans, peas, berries                                                      1.6 to 2.0 g.

      50 g.   French beans, ghosala, figs,                                                   0.9 to 1.5 g.
              grapes, sapota, seetaphal

      25 g.   Whole legumes, nuts                                                          0.9 to 1.5 g.

      50 g.   Leafy vegetables                                                       0.5 to 0.6 g.

      50 g.   Fruits – bananas,                                                     0.4 to 0.6 g.
              apples, limes, etc.

      50 g.   Other vegetables                                                  0.3 to 0.5 g.

      25 g.   Whole wheat or                                                 0.3 to 0.5 g.
              jowar or bajra flour

      50 g.   Roots and tubers                                             0.2 to 0.6 g.

      1 g.    Dry masala mix                                        0.2 to 0.3 g.

                                     Figure 4.1: Fibre content of foods.

      Food Sources: Whole grain cereals, whole wheat flour, fruits such as apples which can be eaten
with their skin, bananas, pineapple, vegetables such as cabbage, amaranth are good sources of fibre
(Figure 4.1). Unusual sources include agar-agar obtained from sea weed (Table 4.4).
44                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Utilisation in the Body: As has already been described, these groups of substances are not
digestible and do not contribute any nutrients to the body. These indigestible substance, however, do
serve a useful purpose in facilitating the elimination of intestinal wastes. They stimulate the peristaltic
movements of the gastrointestinal tract.
       Requirements: The exact amount of fibre needed by the human body cannot be stated. Some
experts feel 100 mg fibre per kg or about five to sixs grams per day is sufficient for the adult. An
average mixed diet consisting of a raw vegetable, fresh fruit with skins, cooked fruits and vegetables
will usually provide sufficient fibre. Fibre content of the diet can be increased by use of some whole
grain cereals or whole wheat bread. Chapatis made from whole wheat flour are also a good source of
fibre.
                                      Table 4.4: Fibre Content of Foods

                      Food                                       Fibre g/100g EP1
                      Cereals, whole                                   1.2–1.9
                      Cereals, refined                                 02–0.7
                      Pulses, whole                                    3.7–5.3
                      Pulses, split                                    0.7–1.5
                      Nuts and oilseeds                                1.3–6.6
                      Vegetables
                      Leafy and other                                  0.5–3.2
                      Roots and tubers                                 0.4–1.8

                      Fruits                                           0.5–2.7

          1. EP-Edible portion.

       Effect of Deficiency: Lack of fibre in the diet usually makes it difficult to eliminate food waste
from the body. Consistent shortage of fibre in the diet could lead to constipation and other disturbances
of the colon. This condition could be corrected by including foods containing whole grain cereals,
fruits with skins and vegetable and fruit salads in the diet.
       Role in Health and Disease: Constipation is a common problem in large percentage of the
population. One of the reasons for this condition is the intake of refined foods. An increase in fibre
intake helps to correct this ailment. Eating leafy vegetables, cluster beans, etc., has been found to
ensure smooth, regular elimination.
       With regular elimination of softer stools, the formation of haemorrhoids is reduced and
diverticulosis is prevented or controlled. Pectins and gums bind bile acids and cholesterol and thus
reduce their blood levels.
       Dietary fibre by increasing bulk and needing more chewing may reduce the food intake. Thus it
can help obese persons to reduce total energy intake and lose weight.
       The carbohydrate absorption is slowed, which helps to regulate blood sugar and lowers insulin
need of diabetics.
Carbohydrates                                                                                           45

      Large soft stools may dilute potential carcinogens. Rapid transit of stools may reduce content of
carcinogens in colon mucosa and thus reduce risk of colon cancer.
      Some problems due to high fibre diets: Dietary fibre is best taken from natural foods and not
as fibre supplements. Food sources provide a variety of fibres, vitamins and minerals in combination,
whereas fibre supplements do not supply any nutrients. An excessive intake of fibre may result in
intestinal obstruction, if it is not accompanied by a liberal intake of water. If fibre intake is increased
suddenly, complaints such as cramping, diarrhoea and excessive intestinal gas are common. To minimise
these effects, the fibre content of the diet should be gradually increased over a period of several weeks.

Sugar Substitutes
      Commercial sugar substitutes or artificial sweeteners are used by people, who wish to reduce
their calorie intake. Two of the commonly available sugar substitutes are aspartame and saccharin.
      Aspartame is a dipeptide of two amino acids, aspartic acid and phenylalanine. Its trade names
are Equal and Nutrasweet. As the dipeptides are unstable to heat, this sweetener cannot be used in
cooked or baked foods. Persons, who suffer from phenylketonuria should avoid use of aspartame.
      Saccharin is o-sulphobenzimide. It is 300 to 500 times as sweet as sucrose and passes through
the body unchanged. It has been used as a sugar substitute for about hundred years without any
adverse effects. It is used in beverages and desserts. The only drawback is it leaves a bitter aftertaste,
if used in large amount.

Study Questions
      1.   Why are cereals used as staple food in India?
      2.   What is photosynthesis?
      3.   List the properties of sugars.
      4.   What are the functions of carbohydrates in our body?
      5.   What is dietary fibre?
      6.   Why is fibre important in the diet?
                                                                                    CHAPTER 5


                           Fats and Other Lipids


     Introduction
     Composition
     Sources
     Classification
         Fatty Acids
         Triglycerides
         Fats, Oils and Other Lipids
             Phospholipids
             Sterols
                Cholesterol
             Lipoproteins
     Functions
     Essential Fatty Acids (EFAs)
        Prostaglandins
        Deficiency of Essential Fatty Acids
     Digestion and Absorption
     Fat Intake in India
     Recommended Dietary Allowances
     Diet and Heart Ailments
         Effect of Diet on Plasma Lipids
            Plasma Cholesterol
            Plasma Triglycerides
     Study Questions
     Structural Formulae



Introduction
      Fats are an essential part of our body, accounting for a sixth of our body weight. The cells and
tissues of our body have fat as an integral part. The vital organs (brain, heart, liver) are protected by a
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                                     47

sheath of fat and water, which holds them in place and prevents injury. The nerves are also protected
by fat. A layer of fat beneath the skin acts as a insulation against cold. The fat around the joints acts as
a lubricant and allows us to move these smoothly. Thus fat is a crucial part of the body composition.
      Fats are the best known members of a chemical group called, the lipids. They constitute an
important part of our Indian dietary and supply 10–30 per cent of the total energy needs. Food fats
include solid fats, liquid oils and related compounds such as fat-soluble vitamins and cholesterol.
      In the middle of last century, fats were expensive and a meal containing large amounts of fat was
called a ‘rich meal’. Persons consuming such meals were thought to be healthy. But with the improvement
in the methods of production and their availability, there has been an indiscriminate increase in fat intake
in some sections of society leading to overweight and obesity. The weight increase discourages
movement, increases pressure on the circulation, respiration and skeletal frame. Hence it is recognised
as a risk factor for several chronic ailments.
      In this chapter, let us consider fats not only as essential body component, nutrient and compact
storage fuel, but also as a health hazard. We need to achieve a realistic balance between meeting our
needs and avoid health problems due to excessive intake.

Composition
      Lipids is an overall group, which includes all fats and related compounds. The word is derived
from the Greek word lipos which means fat. It is used in combination words to name fat-related health
problems, e.g., hyperlipidemia refers to elevated level of blood fats.
      Like carbohydrates, lipids contain the elements carbon, hydrogen and oxygen, and some contain
phosphorus and nitrogen. Lipids have fewer oxygen atoms in their structure than carbohydrates.
Therefore more oxygen is needed to oxidise lipids and more energy (about 2.25 times) is released per
g of lipid as compared to a g of carbohydrate.
      Lipids are an essential part of the body structure. Body fat accounts for 15 to 20 per cent of body
weight in healthy non-obese men and 18 to 25 per cent in healthy non-obese women. The fat content
of body increases in sedentary individuals and senior citizens if they do not have active leisure time
activities.
      Lipids are widely distributed in nature. They are soluble in organic solvents, namely, ether,
chloroform, benzene and other fat solvents. Fatty acids, fats and oils, phospholipids, sterols and
lipoproteins are some of the groups of lipid compounds, which are important in the study of nutrition.

Sources
       Vegetable oils, used in food preparation, are extracts of oilseeds and nuts. The important sources
of vegetable oils are depicted in Figure 5.1. Butter and ghee are animal fats extracted from milk.
       Plant oils are hydrogenated to form a almost solid fat known as vanaspati. Vanaspati is usually
fortified with vitamin A and D, as it is used in place of ghee. The sources of fats in our dietary are listed
in Table 5.1. Oils, butter, ghee and vanaspati contribute the visible fats in the Indian dietary. The
amount of oils and fats in the diet vary with the region. As these are expensive foods, the amount and
kind used in the dietary, varies with the socio-economic status of the family.
       The animal foods, milk, egg, meat and liver, which contain fat, are sources of hidden fat in the
diet. Nuts, oilseeds, milk, eggs and meat supply not only fat but also protein , minerals and vitamins of
the B-complex group. Ghee, butter, eggs and liver are good sources of vitamin A. Some refined oils and
48                                                          Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

vanaspati are fortified with vitamin A. Use of ghee, butter, fortified refined oil or vanaspati helps to
meet a part of the day’s need for vitamin A.
        Table 5.1: Names, Formulae and Melting Points of Some Common Fatty Acids

     No. of Carbon     Fatty Acids                         Formulae                         Melting Point
      Atoms                                                                                     in °C
     Saturated
         4             Butyric            C3H7COOH                                               –7.9
         6             Caproic            C5H11COOH                                              –3.4
         10            Capric             C9H19COOH                                              31.6
         16            Palmitic           C15H31COOH                                             62.9
         18            Stearic            C17H35COOH                                             69.6

     Unsaturated
         18            Oleic              CH3(CH2)7CH = CH(CH2)7COOH                             16.3
         18            Linoleic           CH3(CH2)4CH = CHCH2CH = CH(CH2)7COOH                   – 5.0
         18            Linolenic          CH3CH2CH = CHCH2CH = CHCH2CH =                        – 11.0
                                          CH(CH2)7COOH
         20            Arachidonic        CH3(CH2)4(CH = CHCH2)4(CH2)2COOH                      – 49.5




                                                Olive                   Soya

                                                Palm oil
                                                             Pericarp
                                                 Pericarp
                                                 Shell        Shell
                                                    Kernel Milk
                                                 Kernel   Copra

                                              Palm kernel oil
                               Oil palm                                   Coconut




                                  Sunflower         Cotton                Groundnut

                            Figure 5.1: Important sources of vegetable oils.
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                                       49

      Vegetable oils contain poly-unsaturated fatty acids such as linoleic, linolenic and arachidonic-
acid. Linoleic and arachidonic acid are required for growth and maintenance of integrity of the skin.
Table 5.2 indicates the poly-unsaturated fatty acids present in various oils and fats. It may be noted that
vegetable oils are a fairly good source of essential fatty acids.
      It is easier to control visible fats in the diet than that which is hidden. For example, one can
monitor use of butter, ghee and oil used directly. Invisible fats include the cream in the milk and dahi,
nuts used in preparation and as such, egg yolk, oil used in seasoning vegetables, dal and salads. Even
toned milk contains 3 per cent fat. Invisible fat contributes about 10 or more per cent of total energy in
the diet.

Classification
      Lipids are classified into three groups on the basis of their chemical structure:
       1. Simple lipids, which include fats and oils,
       2. Compound lipids, which comprise of phospholipids and lipoproteins, and
       3. Derived lipids such as fatty acids and sterols.

                                       Table 5.2: Sources of Fats

                    Food                               g/100g                     Calories/100g

             Visible Fats
                    Oil, vegetables                     100.0                           900
                    Vanaspati                           100.0                           900
                    Ghee, cow’s                         99.5                            895
                    Butter                              81.0                            729
             Invisible Fats
                    Oilseeds & nuts                   37.0–64.5                      537–681
                    Mutton, muscle                      13.3                            194
                    Eggs, hen                           13.3                            173
                    Liver, sheep                         7.5                            150
                    Milk, cow                            4.1                            67


Fats, Oils and other Lipids
       There is no precise definition of the word ‘fat’. The term is applied to foods which are fatty,
immiscible in water and greasy in texture.
       Every fat molecule has glycerol at its core and three fatty acids attached to it. The nature of the
fat or the oil depends on the kind of fatty acids linked to the glycerol. The hardness, melting-point and
the flavour of the fat is related to the length of the carbon chain and the level of the saturation of the
fatty acid. If the substance is a liquid at 20°C it is called an oil, if solid at that temperature, it is known
as fat.
       Saturated fatty acids are found in solid fats whereas most of the oils contain unsaturated fatty
acids.
50                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       The unsaturated fatty acids can be converted to saturated ones, thus changing the physical and
chemical characteristics of the oil, by a process known as hydrogenation in which hydrogen is added
on to the oils, in the presence of a catalyst. In the commercial process, hydrogen is added to some (not
all) of the double bonds of the unsaturated fatty acids to increase the firmness and the melting point of
the product. However, this processing also changes the isomers (shape, configuration) of some of the
remaining unsaturated fatty acids. Most unsaturated bonds in nature are in a ‘cis’ form (folded pattern),
but after hydrogenation, many double bonds are in a linear pattern, a ‘trans’ form. Thus although they
are still unsaturated, these ‘trans’ fatty acids behave like saturated fatty acids.
                   Table 5.3: Linoleic and Linolenic Acid Content of Edible Oils

          S.No.         Oil                   Linoleic           Linolenic          Total EFA
                                              g/100g              g/100g             g/100g

             1.     Safflower (Kardi)            74.0                 0.5                74.5
             2.     Soyabean                     52.0                 5.0                57.0
             3.     Sunflower                    52.0                trace               52.0
             4.     Maize (corn)                 50.0                 2.0                52.0
             5.     Cottonseed                   50.3                 0.4                50.7
             6.     Sesame (til)                 40.0                 0.5                40.5
             7.     Rice bran                    33.0                 1.6                34.6
             8.     Groundnut                    28.0                 0.3                28.3
             9.     Rape/mustard                 13.0                 9.0                22.0
             10.    Palmolein                    12.0                 0.3                12.3
             11.    Olive
             12.    Vanaspati                     3.4                 –                   3.4
             13.    Coconut                       2.2                 –                   2.2
             14.    Ghee                          1.6                 0.5                 2.1


Fatty Acids
      Fatty acids are the main building blocks of fats. Fatty acids have a methyl group (CH3) at one end
and a carboxyl group (COOH) at the other end with a chain of carbon and hydrogen atoms in the
middle (formula at the end of the chapter).
      About twenty fatty acids are found in foods and body tissues. The fatty acids have three important
aspects, chain length, saturation and essential fatty acids.
      The number of carbon atoms in fatty acid decides the chain length. Thus short chain fatty acids
contain 4 to 6 carbon atoms, medium chain 8 to 12 carbon atoms, long chain fatty acids have 14–18
carbon atoms and extra-long-chain fatty acids have more than 20 carbon atoms in the molecule. Milk,
fat, vinegar and coconut contain short chain fatty acids, long chain fatty acids are found in most
vegetable oils and animal fats. Fish oils contain the extra-long chain fatty acids (Table 5.4).
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                                    51

     Saturated fatty acid has a single bond between its carbon atoms, thus the molecule is saturated
with hydrogen. Stearic acid is an example of a saturated fatty acid.
     Unsaturated fatty acids have one or more double bonds in their molecule and are thus not
saturated with hydrogen.
     Further monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) have only one double bond in the molecules.
Oleic acid, found in olive oil, is a monounsaturated fatty acid.
                                   Table 5.4: Some Fatty Acids in Foods

      Name              No. of C atoms Chain Length           Type            Food Source

      Acetic                  2            Short             Saturated            Vinegar
      Butyric                 4            Short             Saturated            Butter
      Caproic                 6            Short             Saturated            Butter
      Caprylic                8            Short             Saturated            Coconut
      Myristic                14           Long              Saturated            Nutmeg and Mace
      Palmitic                16           Long              Saturated            Palm oil and lard
      Stearic                 18           Long              Saturated            Beef tallow
      Oleic                   18           Long              Monounsatd.          Olive oil
      Linoleic                18           Long              Polyunsatd.          Groundnut, sesame,
                                                                                  corn oil, sunflower

      Clupanadonic            22           Extra-long        Polyunsatd.          Fish oils

      Polyunsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) have two or more double bonds in the molecules. Corn oil
contains polyunsaturated fatty acids.
      The methyl end of the fatty acid molecule is called the omega end. If the first double bond in the
fatty acid is in the third carbon atom from the methyl end, it is called omega-3 fatty acid; if it is in the
sixth carbon from the methyl end, it is called omega-6- fatty acid and when it is in the ninth carbon, it
is called omega-9 fatty acid.
      Examples of these are:
      Oleic acid — Omega-9-fatty acid, which is a MUFA
      Linoleic acid, omega-6-fatty acid, which is a PUFA.
      Linolenic acid, omega-3-fatty acid, which is also a PUFA.
      Fatty acids are found in all simple and compound lipids. Palmitic (16 carbons), stearic (18 C),
oleic (18 C) and linoleic (18 C) are some of the common fatty acids.
      A small part of free fatty acids are bound to the protein albumin of the blood and are transferred
from the adipose cells to the liver, muscles and other sites.
Triglycerides
     Fatty acids combine with glycerol to form a glyceride. When only one fatty acid combines with
glycerol, it forms a monoglyceride. Diglycerides have two fatty acids and triglycerides three fatty
52                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

acids attached to glycerol. Most of the fatty acids in the body as also in foods occur in the form of
triglycerides.
      Triglyceride molecules contain glycerol — a three carbon alcohol, as a backbone. Three fatty
acids are attached to the three hydroxyl groups (–OH) of glycerol and three molecules of water are
released in this formation of a triglyceride.
      The fatty acids which combine with glycerol may vary in the length of the chain (–R) and vary in
degrees and type of saturation.
      Every time a triglyceride crosses a cell membrane, it must be broken or deesterified and after it
enters the cell it is reesterified. In digestion, most triglycerides are hydrolysed to form free fatty acids,
monoglycerides and glycerol, which are absorbed into the intestinal cells and the majority of these are
rebuilt into triglycerides.
      Phospholipids, which are present in every cell, are formed mainly in the liver from fatty acids,
glycerol, phosphoric acid and a nitrogenous base. Phospholipids look like triglycerides, but contain a
phosphate attached to glycerol in place of one fatty acid. For example, lecithin, a phospholipid contains
choline-phosphate attached to one hydroxyl of the glycerol molecule (formula at the end of the chapter).
      Lecithin is an important component of all membranes. It takes part in fat digestion. Egg yolk
contains lecithin in abundance. Two other phospholipids – sphingomyelins and cerebrosides – are
found in the brain. It is not necessary to provide phospholipids in the diet, as our body makes these
when and where it needs.
      Phospholipids are important as components of active tissues (brain, nervous tissue and liver).
They are powerful emulsifying agents and are essential for the digestion and absorption of fats.
Phospholipids help to carry lipid particles across the cell membrane in the blood stream.
      Sterols are lipids with a multiringed (steroid) structure. Three sterols with functions associated
with nutrition are:
      Ergosterol a plant sterol
      7-dehydrocholesterol an animal sterol and
      cholesterol an animal sterol
      Ergosterol and 7-dehydrocholesterol are two precursors of vitamin D.
      Cholesterol is an important sterol. It is a waxy substance. As you can see (in the formula at the
end of the chapter), cholesterol contains a hydroxyl group (–OH), but it does not resemble a triglyceride.
Like all other lipids, it dissolves in organic solvents (ether, chloroform, etc.). It is the best known of the
sterols and has attracted attention because of the association of elevated blood cholesterol levels with
heart ailments.
      Triglycerides, phospholipids and sterols share a common background — most parts of these
molecules are synthesised from a derivative of acetic acid, which is the smallest fatty acid.
      Cholesterol is an essential part of each cell and every type of human cell makes cholesterol.
Each day our liver makes about 800 mg of cholesterol, which circulates through the blood stream and
is used wherever it is needed.
      It is a precursor of vitamin D, hormones and bile acids. The hormones made from cholesterol
include corticosteroids, estrogens, testosterone and calcitriol (the active vit. D hormone). Bile acids
needed for fat digestion, are formed from cholesterol.
      The cholesterol content of heart, liver, kidney and egg (embryonic stage of life) is quite high. In
infancy and toddlers stage, new tissues are formed, especially brain which need cholesterol. Hence fat
should not be restricted in the diet of children up to five years of age.
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                                     53

      Lipoproteins are synthesised in the liver. They are composed of three-fourth to two-third lipids
and the remainder protein. These serve as the major vehicle for fat transport in the blood stream. The
blood is mainly water and fat needs a water soluble cover of protein to permit it to be carried by blood.
The lipoproteins contain triglycerides, cholesterol and other substances such as fat soluble vitamins.
The density of lipoproteins is dependent on the amounts of fat and protein in it. The higher the fat
content, the lower the density.
      Four groups of, lipoproteins that have been identified are chylomicrons, low density lipoproteins
(LDL), high density lipoproteins (HDL), and very low density lipoproteins (VLDL). The LDLs carry
fat and cholesterol to cells. The HDLs carry free cholesterol from body tissues to the liver for breakdown
and excretion. Like cholesterol, there is much interest now in these lipoproteins because their concentration
in the blood plasma needs to be maintained within certain limits for good health. Their levels in blood
plasma are routinely tested to detect lipid disorders, which are related to heart ailments.

Functions
      Fat is a major nutrient and it has several functions. Oils and fats are concentrated sources of
energy. Each, gramme supplies 9 calories.
      Besides providing energy, oils and fats have several functions in the body. Food fats are a source
of two groups of essential nutrients — essential fatty acids (EFA) and fat soluble vitamins A, D, E & K
and their precursors. Food fats also aid the transport and absorption of fat-soluble vitamins.
      Cholesterol is an essential lipid synthesised in the liver. Some important hormones and bile acids
are formed from cholesterol. Fat forms the fatty centre of cell walls, helping to carry nutrient materials
across cell membranes.
      Fats are used to synthesise phospholipids, which are found in all cells.
      Fat stored in various parts of the body is known as adipose tissue. The vital organs in the body
are supported and protected by a web-like padding of this tissue. Fats act as a cushion for certain vital
organs. Nerve fibres are protected by the fat covering and it aids relay of nerve impulses.
      Since fat is a poor conductor of heat, a layer of fat beneath the skin helps to conserve body heat
and regulate body temperature.
      The flavour, palatibility and satiety value of foods is increased by fats. The slower rate of digestion
of fat as compared to carbohydrates results in a feeling of satisfaction.
      Fats may have other functions, which are not as yet clear.
Essential Fatty Acids (EFAs)
      Linoleic acid (omega-6 PUFA) and linolenic acid (omega-3 PUFA) are called essential fatty acids
because
       1. these are not synthesised in the human body
       2. these are required for important functions in the body and
       3. these are available only through diet.
      The EFAs have several important functions. They are essential for growth in the young and
maintenance of normal healthy skin. Their other functions are as components of membranes to ensure
their permeability to water and other small molecules. They are precursors of eicosanoids, a group of
important metabolites which regulate vascular function, one of these are prostaglandins.
      The omega-3 fatty acids, DHA (decosa hexenoic acid) and EPA (eicosa pentenoic acid) have an
important role in fetal brain and eye development. These acids also protect against rheumatoid arthritis
and cardiovascular diseases.
54                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Certain varieties of fish are the richest food sources of these fatty acids. In some countries
‘designer eggs’ have been produced with enhanced levels of these omega-3 fatty acids by including
DHA-rich algae in the chicken feed.
      Common plant oils with the exception of coconut are good sources of linoleic acid.
      Green leafy vegetables, cabbage and lettuce are good sources of omega-3-fatty acids. Soyabean
and rape seed are also good sources of omega-3-fatty acids. Fatty fish, such as tuna, sardines and
salmon are good sources of omega-3-fatty acids and a weekly consumption of any of these fish can
help to meet the need.
      The U.K. Dept. of Health Publication (1991) recommends that linoleic acid (n-6) should provide
at least one per cent and linolenic acid (n-3) at least 0.2 per cent dietary energy for infants, children and
adults to meet their EFA requirements (Table 5.2).
      EFAs are used to synthesise certain prostaglandins. Prostaglandins prolong bleeding time, reduce
the thickness and stickiness of platelets, lower levels of triglycerides and very low density lipoproteins
(VLDL) in the blood. Thus artery blockage is reduced. Prostaglandins also reduce inflammation and
thus reduce pain in certain ailments (e.g., in rheumatoid arthritis).
      Deficiency of EFAs: Deficiency of EFAs results in a flaky skin, development of itchy sores on
scalp and retardation of growth. Diarrhoea and other symptoms may also develop. These symptoms of
deficiency appear in low-birth weight infants fed fat-free formulas and in adults fed for long periods on
intravenous solutions, which contain no lipid.
      EFA deficiency results in changes in the fatty acid composition of many tissues, which include
biological membranes and mitochondria.

Digestion and Absorption
      The digestion of fats starts in the stomach, where a coarse emulsion forms due to churning
action. The chemical changes necessary for fat digestion occur in the small intestine. The entry of fat
in the duodenum, the first part of the small intestine stimulates secretion of the bile from the gall
bladder. The fat gets emulsified by the bile preparing it for digestion.
      The fat is broken into small particles, thus increasing the surface area and the surface tension is
lowered improving the enzyme action and penetration. Pancreatic lipase breaks off one fatty acid at a
time from the triglyceride. Thus one fatty acid plus a diglyceride, then another fatty acid plus a
monoglyceride and glycerol are produced. Each subsequent step of this process occurs with more
difficulty.
      The cholesterol esterase from pancreatic juice acts on the free cholesterol to form a combination
of cholesterol and fatty acids for absorption first into the lymph vessels and finally into the blood
stream.
      Lecithinase, secreted by the small intestine, acts on lecithin to break into its components for
absorption.
      The products of digestion are absorbed through the walls of the small intestine and circulated
through the lymph. Some of these are used to synthesise important lipid compounds needed for body
function. Some fat is used to supply energy. The rest is stored as fat in the adipose tissues for future
use.
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                                   55


Fat Intake in India
      Diet surveys by National Nutrition Monitoring Bureau (NNMB) of India show that the daily intake
of visible fats vary from 3 to 20g/day in rural India and 20 to 42g/day in urban areas. In addition
invisible fat intake may vary from 16 to 30 g and in some population groups 50g/day. Thus the total fat
intake may contribute 10 to 30 per cent of dietary energy.
      The nature of edible oil used in the diet varies from one part of the country to another; it is
groundnut oil in west and south India, coconut oil in Kerala, rape/mustard oil from punjab to West
Bengal along the Gangetic plain and safflower in north Karnataka and parts of southern Maharashtra.
      While a minimum amount of fat in the diet is essential, excess is harmful. Hence the minimum
level and the safe upper limit of fat intake have to be considered.

Recommended Dietary Allowances
      The fat requirement is based on two factors, namely to meet energy and the essential fatty acids
needs. About 10 per cent of the total energy need is met by invisible fat in the diet. A minimum of 5 per
cent of total energy needs to be provided as visible fat in the diet. This works out to about, 12 g of fat
per day. A higher, level of intake of 20 g/day is desirable to provide energy density and palatability for
normal adults.
      It is desirable that an upper limit of 20 g/day of fat intake for adults and 25 g/day for young
children be followed, in view of the possible complications resulting from excessive intake of fat.
However, in order to meet the essential fatty acid needs, the diet should contain at least 10 g of
vegetable oil, which is a good source of linoleic acid.

Diet and Heart Ailments
      Fat is essential for our health, but too much of it can lead to ill health. A section of Indians have
a high intake of fat, a large part of it is saturated fats (milk sweets, eggs and other flesh foods), and a
very sedentary lifestyle. Their energy intake in excess of needs leads to obesity and an unacceptable
blood lipid profile. If unchecked, there is deposition of fatty material with formation of plaques in the
arteries, which disturbs the movement of oxygen and nutrients. It leads to a variety of heart ailments,
such as atherosclerosis, high blood pressure and others.
      There are a number of factors associated with susceptibility to heart ailments that can be controlled
to a great extent. These include elevation of plasma lipid levels, obesity, physical inactivity and heavy
smoking.
      The risk factors related to diet will be discussed here.
Effect of Diet on Plasma Lipids
      Plasma cholesterol (CHOL): Research conducted at Stanford and other medical centres throughout
the world has proved that few heart attacks occur in people, who have total CHOL readings in the
160mg/dl range. The risk of heart disease accelerates as the total CHOL level creeps past the 200 mg/
dl mark.
      Animal fats, a source of saturated fats in the diet, are also high in CHOL content. The saturated
fats are known to increase the total CHOL and LDL production in the liver, leading to increased levels
in the blood plasma.
56                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Increased serum CHOL level above 200 mg/dl and low density lipoproteins (LDL) above 130 mg/
dl are associated with increased risk of coronary heart disease (CHD). The high-density lipoproteins
(HDL) level in the blood is a beneficial factor, as it protects the blood vessel against formation of fatty
deposit (atheroma), by moving the fatty material away.
       The following changes in lifestyle can help normalise the plasma CHOL and LDL level:
         • Reduce in intake of saturated fats (ghee, butter, vanaspati, lard, etc.).
         • Reduce food cholesterol intake to 300 mg/day or less.
         • Increase physical activity to alter cholesterol components in the blood plasma.
         • Attain and maintain ideal body weight for your body build and height by controlling your
            total energy intake.
       Plasma triglycerides (TRG): Triglycerides, another blood fat, have been identified as the
transporter that moves fat in the bloodstream from one location to another. For instance, it moves it to
your liver when it needs it, to your muscles when you are exercising or to your waistline when you are
not.
       High triglyceride levels are linked to coronary heart disease (CHD), though the connection is still
not well understood. When a high LDL and high TRGs (levels over 200 mg/dl) were found together;
the risk for subsequent heart attacks, increased. It appears that refined sugar causes TRGs to rise; one
of the reasons for controlling excessive sugar intake in a heart-healthy diet.
       The level of fat in the diet has been the subject of many studies. In one study, healthy, normal-
weight volunteers were placed on either an ultralean 10 per cent fat diet or a rich 40 per cent fat diet.
Each volunteer ate the number of calories required to maintain his/her body weight. Each ten days their
TRG level in plasma was checked. They found that the volunteers on high-fat diet were manufacturing
little or no fat. But those on low-fat diet were producing copious amounts of saturated fat. Sensing that
a fat famine was under way, their bodies had cranked up the machinery that converts carbohydrates
into fat, one of the built-in mechanisms that permits humans to survive in lean times. In fact, 30 to 57
per cent of the fatty acids in their TRGs was self-made saturated fat. Thus moderate intake of fats may
be desirable to maintain normal TRG levels.
       Research findings suggest that meal patterns may influence the blood lipid levels. In a college
study, it was found that the mean CHOL and TRG values were the lowest in those eating six meals a
day and highest in those eating one meal a day. Thus frequent, regular meal times, with appropriate,
moderate mix of fat and carbohydrate components, and appropriate calorie restriction, can help to
decrease plasma TRGs level and maintain it at normal level.
       Physical Activity: Besides diet, physical activity is an important component in the control of
obesity, plasma lipid levels and prevention of CHD. Exercise lowers fasting plasma TRG levels even
during periods of increased energy intake. It is also known to increase the level of HDL, which protects
the health of the blood vessels.
       Thus it is possible for us to prevent disabling heart disease and ensure the health of our heart.

Study Questions
      1.   What are fatty acids? What are the main differences in various fatty acids?
      2.   Write short notes on triglycerides, phospholipids and cholesterol.
      3.   What are the functions of fat in the body?
      4.   What are essential fatty acids? Discuss their functions and effects of their deficiency.
Fats and Other Lipids                                                                          57

      5.   What are lipoproteins? What is their significance in the body?
      6.   Trace the digestion of fat in the gastrointestinal tract.
      7.   What is the basis of current RDAs for fat?
      8.   Discuss the relationship between fat and heart ailments. What are the suggested ways to
           prevent heart ailments?

Structural Formulae
                                                    CHAPTER 6


               Proteins and Amino Acids


Introduction
Composition
Structure and Classification
Functions
   Building of Body Tissues
   Maintenance of Tissues and Repair
   Regulatory Functions
   Precursors of Enzymes, Hormones and Antibodies
   Transport of Nutrients
   Special Functions of Amino Acids
   Milk Formation
   Energy Source
Food Sources of Protein
Protein Digestion and Absorption
Essential Amino Acids
Protein Quality
Measurement of Protein Quality
   Biological Value
   Net Protein Utilisation
   Protein Efficiency Ratio
   Chemical Score
Recommended Dietary Allowance
Vegetarian Diets
Protein Sources in Indian Vegetarian Diets
Clinical Problems
    Protein Excess
    Protein Deficiency
Study Questions and Activities
Structural Formulae
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                                   59


Introduction
      Next to water, protein is the most abundant component of the body. It accounts for about a sixth
of the live body weight and a third of it is found in the muscles, a fifth in the bones and cartilage, a tenth
in the skin and the remainder in other tissues and body fluids.
      There are thousands of different specific proteins in the body, each having a unique structure and
function. For this reason, the word protein implies not one but a large group of complex compounds.
      Proteins are present in all living tissues, both plant and animal. They are essential to life because
vital parts of the nucleus and protoplasts of every cell are proteins.

Composition
      Proteins are very large organic compounds. Proteins, like carbohydrates and fats, contain carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen. In addition, proteins contain about 16 per cent nitrogen, which is their unique
feature and distinguishes them from carbohydrates and fats. Some proteins also contain sulphur and
sometimes phosphorus, iron and cobalt. Proteins are more complex than fats and carbohydrates, as the
size of the molecule is large and there is a great variation in the units from which it is formed.
      Plants are the primary source of proteins in nature. Proteins are synthesised by the plants from
the nitrates and ammonia in the soil. Herbivorous animals use plant proteins to meet their protein needs.
Man uses plant foods as also animal foods (milk and meat) to meet his protein needs. Nitrogen is
returned to the soil through degradation of products of animal metabolism, excretion of nitrogen
compounds in urine and faeces, and decomposition of animal body at death, to complete the natural
nitrogen cycle.

Structure and Classification
      All proteins in our body and food are built from basic units or compounds known as amino acids.
Amino acids combine to form proteins by means of a peptide bond, which joins a carboxylic carbon of
one amino acid with nitrogen of another.1 The resulting peptide has a free carboxyl at one end and a free
amino group at the other, permitting addition of other amino acids at either end. The proteins are amphoteric
in nature due to the presence of a free acid and a free amino group in their molecule. Polypeptiddes thus
formed constitute the primary structure of proteins. The secondary structure formed by linking
several polypeptide chains may be helical, pleated or random coil. More complex proteins have a tertiary
structure in whcih the polypeptide chain is wound into a globular form.
      Proteins exist in fibrous or globular form. Fibrous proteins appear in structure elements, e.g.,
collagen of connective tissue, myosin of muscle tissue and keration of hair. Globular proteins are very
soluble and occur in tissue fluids; these include casein, egg albumin, albumins and globulins of blood
plasma and haemoglobin. In conjugated form, they form most of the intracellular enzymes.
1.The word ‘amino’ indicates that they contain a — NH2 group; the word ‘acid’ indicates that they contain a
                                                                                          NH2
                                                                                            |
—COOH (an acid or carbonyl group). The common structure of an amino acid is HOOC — C — R , where,
                                                                                         |
                                                                                         H
‘R’ indicates the remainder of the molecule. This attachment may be a hydrogen atom or a more complex
group; its structure accounts for the difference in various amino acids.1
60                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Simple proteins yield only amino acids on hydrolysis. Albumins, globulins, glutelins, prolamins
and albuminoids are simple proteins. Albumins and globulins, which are soluble in water and salt
solution are present in animal fluids (milk, blood, plasma). Those which are less soluble are present in
tissues (muscle, protein, myosin).
      Conjugated proteins are combinations of simple proteins with non-protein substances. The
combinations result in formations, which are functionally very important to the body. Conjugated
proteins include:
        • Lipoproteins (proteins + lipids) found in blood plasma (HDL, LDL, VLDL, etc.).
        • Nucleoproteins (proteins + nucleic acids) found in cells (RDA, DNA).
        • Mucoproteins and glycoproteins (proteins + polysaccharides) found in gastric secretion
           (mucin).
        • Phosphoproteins (proteins + phosphoric acid) are found in milk, e.g., casein.
        • Metalloproteins (proteins + metals) are found in ferritin, hemosidirin.
      Derived proteins are proteoses, peptones and peptides formed in the various stages of protein
metabolism.

Functions
       The primary function of proteins is tissue building.
       Proteins are the main solid matter in the muscles, they are also the major constituents of blood,
matrix of bones, teeth, skin, nails and hair. Our body, which consists of about 60 per cent water and
19 per cent fat is held together by only 17 per cent proteins and 4 per cent minerals.
       The principal functions of proteins in the body are discussed below.
       Body-Building or Building of New Tissues: Protein is an essential part of every cell. We cannot
synthesise (form) protein from simple nitrogen compounds as plants do. Therefore amino acids must
be supplied in the diet for building new tissues. Proteins provide the amino acids needed for the formation
of new cells. They also provide the material from which nucleic acids are formed, e.g., DNA and RNA,
which carry the genetic code.
       The amount needed at various stages of life varies with the rate of growth. Infants need more
proteins per unit of body weight than adolescents, because the rate of growth is the highest during
infancy. More protein is needed in the last part of pregnancy as compared to the first part.
       There may be a need to supply extra protein, to rebuild tissues after their loss or destruction. The
loss may occur in any one of the following ways;
        1. Donation of blood,
        2. Excessive menstruation,
        3. Haemorrhage after an accident,
        4. destruction of tissues due to burns, in wasting diseases such as TB (tuberculosis0, rheumatic
            fever, etc.
       Maintenance of tissues: The need for protein to maintain and repair the old tissues continues
throughout life. Proteins in the body tissues are not static; they are constantly being broken down and
replaced by new protein synthesised from amino acids from dietary and tissue sources. For example,
the lining of the intestinal tract is renewed almost everyday and a half; the protein in the liver and blood
plasma is broken down and remade every six days, blood cells have a life span of 120 days and
adequate replacement must be supplied to avoid anaemia. In fact, all body proteins are constantly being
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                                61

degraded and synthesised at varying rates. Thus there is a continuous need for protein to provide for
the maintenance of tissues already built.
      Regulatory Functions: Haemoglobin, a protein and iron complex, ensures the smooth running
of respiratory cycle by being the vital oxygen carrier in the red blood cells.
      Proteins in fluids such as blood help to regulate body processes. Plasma proteins contribute to
osmotic pressure and thus exert an important influence on the exchange of water between tissue cells
and the surrounding fluids and on the water balance of the body as a whole.
      The amphoteric1 nature of proteins is useful in maintaining acid-base balance of blood and
tissues. Their amphoteric nature further makes them ideal carriers of nutrients across cell membranes.
The blood proteins (haemoglobin and oxyhaemoglobin) combine with the carbon dioxide formed in
cellular metabolism and excrete it in the expired air. The metabolic products which are acidic or basic
combine with protein and are carried through the system without affecting the tissue pH excessively.
      Proteins as Precursors of Enzymes, Hormones and Antibodies: A small amount of protein
(or of amino acids) is needed for synthesising enzymes, hormones and antibodies. All enzymes are
proteins and are essential catalysts in digestion and metabolic processes in the tissues. Hormones,
secreted by various glands are proteins in nature. Hormones regulate and co-ordinate body processes
and activities. Hormones are chemical messengers, synthesised in the body. They are responsible for
regulating all the activities of the body. Examples of hormones are insulin, thyroxine, growth hormones,
steroid hormones, etc. Proteins form antibodies and special white blood cells defend the body against
infection and disease and thus participate in the body’s immune system.
      Transport of Nutrients: Due to their amphoteric nature, proteins are ideal carriers of nutrients
across cell membranes. Proteins as lipoproteins transport triglycerides, cholesterol, phospholipids and
fat soluble vitamins across the cell wall. Specific protein carriers ensure transport of many vitamins
and minerals. Albumin carries free fatty acids, bilirubin as also many drugs.
      Special Functions of Amino Acids: Almost all amino acids have some unique functions in the
body. A few of these are listed here. Tryptophan serves as a precursor for the B-vitamin niacin and
serotonin, a neuro-transmitter. Glycine, a simple ubiquitous amino acid is used in synthesis of porphyrin
nucleus of haemoglobin. It is also a constituent of one of the bile acids. It combines with many toxic
substances to form harmless products, which are excreted.
      Glycine, methionine and arginine synthesise creatinine, which with phosphate forms creatine
phosphate, an important, form of high energy compound in the cell.
      Histidine is used in the synthesis of histamine used as a vasodilator in the circulatory system.
Glutamic acid is a precursor of a neuro-transmitter. Phenylalanine is a precursor of tyrosine and
together they lead to the formation of thyroxine and epinephrine. Tyrosine is also the precursor of skin
and hair pigment. Methionine, the sulphur-containing amino acid, is the principal donor of methyl
groups in the synthesis of choline and other important compounds.
      Milk Formation : Mother’s milk is the first food for a young of any mammal. Human milk
contains about 1.2 per cent protein. The milk proteins are synthesised in the mammary gland from the
available dietary and tissue proteins. A nursing mother needs to take extra protein in her diet to meet the
demands of protein for milk formation.
      Energy Supply: A small part of the body’s need for energy (about 6 to 12 per cent) is supplied by
products of protein metabolism. Each gramme of food protein yields four calories to the body.

1. Amphoteric: capable of acting both as a base and an acid.
62                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Food Sources of Protein
       Plants are the primary source of protein, because they can synthesise protein by combining
nitrogen and water from the soil and carbon dioxide from the air. Animals depend on plants to fulfill
their protein requirement.
       The food sources of protein are listed in Table 6.1. It may be observed that pulses, whole and
split, nuts and oilseeds, milk, eggs, fish, poultry and meat are good sources of protein the diet. Cereals
and their products are a major source of protein in the Indian dietary (Figure 6.1).
       Cereals and pulses, when cooked in water, supply only one-third or less of the protein present in
the raw foods, as these foods absorb at least two times their weight of water. There is no increase in
weight of milk, eggs, meat and fish during cooking. Therefore, there is likely to be very little decrease
in the amount of protein supplied by these foods when cooked.
       Another aspect of evaluating the foods as sources of protein is the quantity of food that is
normally consumed and the frequency of the use of the food. In India, cereals are consumed in large
quantities and are included in almost all the meals. Therefore, these contribute a large part of the day’s
need for protein in the Indian dietary. Secondly, pulses are included in most of the meals, along with the
cereals, which results in a high quality protein in the diet. Proteins from leafy vegetables are an excellent
supplement to the cereal diet.
       Milk is one animal food, which is accepted and included in menus for feast as well as fast. The
quantity of milk included depends on the availability and cost. Thus cereals, pulses, milk and milk
products contribute most of the protein in the Indian dietary.
       Dry, salted or smoked fish and meat are inexpensive concentrated sources of protein. These
contribute valuable protein in the diet of people from coastal regions.
                                      Table 6.1: Sources of Protein
                                      Units recommended                    Protein
              Food                                                                   g in units recommended 2
                                           for adults           g per unit1
     Cereals—rice, wheat,                      10                   2–3                       20–30
        millets and their products
     Dals, pulses                              2                     6                        10–12
     Milk, Curds,   etc.3                     1–2                    5                        5–10
     Eggs 3                                    1                     6                          6
     Meat, Fish,   Poultry3                   0–1                   5–6                        5–6
     Vegetables
        Leafy green                            1                    1–2                        1–2
         Beans and Peas                        1                    2–4                        2–4
        Roots, Tubers and Others               1                     1                          1
     Fruits (vitamin C-rich)                   1                     1                          1



1. Amount of food per unit is indicated in, Chapter 14, Table 14.1.
2. Units as recommended in the food guide in Chapter 14.
3. Units of animal foods included in the diet, vary with dietary pattern and cost.
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                               63

       Eggs are included in one meal of the day by those who accept them. Normally fish, meat and/or
poultry are included one or two times a week. Please remember that the importance of any food as a
source of protein depends on how often and how much of it is consumed.
      It may be observed that the concentration of protein in most vegetables and fruits is small.
Therefore, these may not be counted to supply more than 10 per cent of the day’s intake. Though the
quantity supplied may be small, these proteins do enhance the quality of protein in the diet.
      It is known that if the kinds and amounts of amino acids in the food proteins in a meal are in
keeping with the body’s need, the protein mix is efficiently utilised. Thus when cereals and pulses are
included in the same meal, the essential amino acid content of the two together is more in keeping with
the body’s needs than that of each of these taken singly.
      Any additional foods such as curd (buttermilk) and vegetables or fish/meat, which may be included
in the meal may help improve the quality of the protein by virtue of the essential amino acids they
supply. Thus including two or more sources of protein in the menu for each meal helps to improve the
quality of protein and its utilisation. Some of the regional dietary patterns are based on this principle.




                                  Figure 6.1: Food Sources of Protein.
64                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Protein Digestion and Absorption
      Protein digestion starts only in the stomach as there are no protein splitting enzymes in the saliva.
In the stomach, protein is hydrolysed by the enzymes with the help of hydrochloric acid into peptides
or amino acids. This process continues in both the duodenum and the small intestine, where the
pancreatic and intestinal enzymes complete the hydrolysis by converting almost all the protein into
amino acids.




                                 Figure 6.2: Protein-energy malnutrition.

      It is reported that approximately 92 per cent of the dietary protein is digested from a mixed diet.
Proteins of plant origin, especially those bound with cellulose are digested less then those of animal
origin. The amino acids thus formed are absorbed either by the stomach wall, the intestinal walls or by
the colon. Most of the amino acids are, however, absorbed in the small intestine. After passing through
the walls of the digestive tract, the amino acids are picked up by the circulating blood stream and
transported to the liver and to the various body tissues.
      For the synthesis of proteins in the body, both essential and non-essential amino acids must be
available in adequate amounts.
      Non-essential amino acids can be formed in the body by the combination of essential amino acid
groups with metabolic products of carbohydrates and fats by a process known as transamination.
      Some of the amino acids are split off by a process known as deamination. The nitrogenous by-
products, if not utilised, are excreted in urine as urea, uric acid and creatinine.

Essential Amino Acids
     There are 22 (or more) amino acids, all of which are vital to human life and health. The body is
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                                     65

able to synthesise 13 of these but is unable to make 9 others. These nine amino acids have to be
provided in the diet in sufficient amounts and are called essential amino acids.3
      Arginine is called semiessential, because it may not be synthesised in sufficient amounts to meet
the rapid growth of infants, especially premature ones and may need to be supplied in the diet.
      Non-essential amino acids: The word non-essential is misleading for these are necessary in the
body for tissue building, repair and other metabolic functions. These are so important that the body
synthesises these itself. The only reason these are termed non-essential is because these need not be
provided in the diet. The formulae of amino acids are given at the end of the chapter.

Protein Quality
      The food proteins vary greatly in their amino acid compositon. Protein quality depends on the
kinds and amounts of the essential amino acids present in the food proteins. It is reported that certain
food proteins lack one or more essential amino acids. For example, cereals are low in lysine, most of
the pulses contain a small amount of methionine. Most of the animal proteins such as milk, eggs,
poultry, fish and meat contain all essential amino acids.
      However, as cereals and pulses are normally consumed together with other foods such as vegetables,
curd, etc., the lack in one food is supplemented by the other foods. In other words, various foods
when eaten together in a meal, complement each other and improve the quality of protein supplied to
the body.

Measurement of Protein Quality
     There are several methods to determine the quality of protein in the diet. These are biological
value (BV), net protein utilisation (NPU), protein efficiency ratio (PER) and chemical score.
     Biological Value: Biological value is the percentage of the absorbed nitrogen (N) retained by the
body. The nitrogen content of the food eaten by an animal and the nitrogen content of the urine and
faeces are determined. The biological value (BV) is calculated by using the formula:
                         N retained by the body (dietary N - (urinary N + faecal N ) × 100
                  BV =
                                        N absorbed (dietary N - faecal N )
      The quality of protein is directly related to its BV. The BV increases with increase in the percentage
of nitrogen absorbed being retained.
      The BV of milk is 84, brown rice 73 and whole wheat 65.
      Due to complementary effect of food mixtures, the BV of mixed diets is higher than the arithmetical
average of the component of food proteins.
      Net Protein Utilisation (NPU): Net protein utilisation is digestibility of protein multiplied by its
BV.
      Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER): Protein efficiency ratio is not based on intake and output of
food protein residues. Therefore it is less accurate than BV and NPU. But the technique is easy and it
is also easy to use. In this method, a known amount of test protein in an adequate diet is fed to young
rats for four weeks under standardised conditions and the weight gain is determined. The PER is
obtained by dividing the weight gain by grams of protein fed.
3. Eight amino acids needed by adults are isoleucine (I), leucine (L), lysine (L), methionine (M), phenylalanine
(P), threonine (T), tryptophan (T) and valine (V). One needed by growing chindren is histidine (H).
66                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                                        weight gain in g
                                   PER =
                                        protein fed in g
     The PER of milk is reported to be 3 and polished rice 2.2.
     Chemical Score: Chemical score is based on the comparison of amino acid composition of the
food protein with the amino acid of a reference protein scuh as milk, egg or FAO reference protein
(1973). The amino acid score is the concentration of the limiting amino acid per gram in the food/food
mixture as a percentage of the same amino acids per gram in the acid of the reference protein.
     The formula used is:
                          mg of limiting amino acid / g of test protein × 100
                         mg of the same amino acid / g of reference protein

Recommended Dietary Allowance
      The requirement of the body for protein as determined by nitrogen balance studies is between 0.5
to 0.6g/kg of body weight in adults, when the source of protein supplies the amino acids in the proportion
needed by the body. In practice, the amino acids of the food combination may not be so well proportioned;
therefore the recommended daily allowance for protein is set to 1.0 g/kg of body weight for adults.
      During infancy, pregnancy and lactation there is an increased need of protein for growth. Persons
suffering from burns or wasting diseases such as tuberculosis and rheumatic fever, also need additional
protein for regeneration of wasted tissues. Similarly if there is loss of blood due to excessive menstruation,
haemorrhages or blood donation, more protein is needed in the diet.
      The recommended dietary intake of proteins are presented in Table 6.2.
                      Table 6.2: Recommended Dietary Intakes of Proteins.1

             Particulars of the Individual                                         Protein g/day
             Man (60 kg)                                                                 60
             Woman (50 kg)                                                               50
             Woman, pregnant (latter half of pregnancy)                                  65
             Woman, nursing mother (0–6 months of lactation)                             75
             Infants, 0–6 months                                                   2.05 g/kg/day
             Infants, 7–12 months                                                  1.65 g/kg/day
             Children, 1–3 years                                                         22
             Children, 4–6 years                                                         30
             Children, 7–9 years                                                         41
             Boys 10–12 years                                                            54
             Girls 10–12 years                                                           57
             Girls 13–15 years                                                           70
             Boys, 13–15 years                                                           65
             Boys, 16–18 years                                                           78
             Girls, 16–18 years                                                          63

1.   Recommended Dietary Intakes for Indians, ICMR, 1990.
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                                67


Vegetarian Diets
       A large number of Indian people (10 to 15 per cent of the population) are vegetarians, due to their
religion and belief in the principles of non-violence. A large section of non-vegetarians (about 80 per
cent) restrict their consumption of animal foods to one or two days of the week. Thus they are
vegetarians for 5 to 6 days each week. One important feature of the Indian diet is that milk and milk
products are accepted universally in the vegetarian diet. Thus they are lactovegetarians. It is easy to
plan a nutritionally adequate lactovegetarian diet. Indian vegetarians, therefore, do not face the problems
encountered by vegans and fruitarian in meeting their nutritional needs.
       Protein Sources in the Indian Vegetarian Diet: The protein sources in the Indian vegetarian
diet are cereals, dals and legumes, milk and milk products, immature beans and peas, vegetables and
fruits. Over six varieties of cereals and millets and sixteen types of dals and legumes are used in Indian
diet. Being a tropical country there are over 150 varieties of leafy and 250 other vegetables to choose
from, resulting in nutritionally rich combinations.
       In the normal Indian diet, cereals are the staple food and dals or legume, milk and vegetable
preparations are served with cereal preparations. Naturally the quality of the protein combination is
excellent.

Clinical Problems
      Protein Excess: Though protein is a vital need of the body, intake of excess creates stress on the
body function. The liver has to deaminise the extra amino acids and synthesise urea. The loss of
calcium in the urine is increased with high protein intake. High protein from animal foods carries
undesirable saturated fats also along with it.
      As protein foods are expensive, their increased intake may lead to lesser intake of nutrient rich,
foods and thus reduce the quality of the diet. Adequate protein is good; but excess intake is not
desirable.
Deficiency of Proteins
      Latent stage: The deficiency of proteins accompanied by that of energy is one of the most
common nutritional deficiencies in India. In the early stages, it may not be noticed. Research reports
indicate that animals on low protein diets tend to be small, but their functioning is not affected.
Children tend to have retarded growth but this may not be noticed, if all children from the neighbourhood
are of small stature due to protein deficient dietary. Further it may also result in thin, lanky bodies in
teens.
      Protein deficiency during pregnancy may result in stress, which could give rise to complications
such as vomitting, swelling of feet, etc. If these symptoms are commonly prevalent, they are accepted
as a normal part of pregnancy. Some think it is a hereditary condition. Thus due to ignorance, protein
deficiency in pregnancy may not be detected and thus there will be no improvement in the diet. This
condition may not be restricted to low socio-economic groups. It may adversely affect the growth of
the foetus and foetal stores for future. Thus the infant’s survival and health are affected by maternal
nutrition. In children, lack of protein in the diet results in stunted growth and low weight.
      Severe Deficiency: If there is severe deficiency of protein in the first two years of life, it could
affect mental development, learning ability and behaviour.
      In India and other tropical developing countries, protein-energy malnutrition (PEM) is a common
disorder during childhood. When the child is weaned, the diet often does not contain an adequate
68                                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

quantity and quality of protein which results in deficiency diseases. When an infant is fed high
carbohydrate low protein foods such as ogi (corn starch porridge) as in West Africa, kwashiorkor, a
typical protein deficiency condition occurs. When both protein and calorie are very low in the diet,
nutritional marasmus could occur. In other words, kwashiorkor is a deficiency disease due to severe
lack of protein but nutritional marasmus is due to sheer starvation (Figure 6.2).
      The education of prospective parents about childcare and nutrition can ensure good nutrition of
infants and young children and prevent protein-calorie malnutrition. Greater attention is needed to
appropriate supplementary nutrition for children in the 0–2 age group, the most critical period in terms
of brain and body growth.

Study Questions and Activities
      1. List the functions of proteins and discuss these.
      2. What are essential amino acids?
      3. Write short notes on: protein quality, biological value, special functions of amino acids,
         deamination, urea cycle, vegetarian diet.
      4. Prepare dishes which supply 5–6 g of proteins. Record the cost of each preparation.
      5. Prepare khichdi, idli, thalipeeth using 100 g of the major ingredients. Record the number of
         servings obtained from the preparation. Calculate the protein and energy obtained from a
         portion of each preparation.
                                               Essential Amino Acids

                                                                                                                    NH2
            C2H5                NH2            CH3                             NH2         (NH2)CH2 (CH2)3 CH
                   CH CH                                 CH CH2 CH                                                  COOH
             CH3                COOH           CH3                             COOH
                                                                                                     Lysine
                   Isoleucine                              Leucine




                                      NH2                                        NH2       CH3                NH2
      CH3    S     CH2 CH2 CH                                    CH2 CH                           CH CH
                                      COOH                                       COOH       HO                COOH

              Methionine                                     Phenylalanine                        Threonine



                                                                 N       CH
                                                  NH2
                                      CH2 CH                                               NH2
                                |                            HC            C    CH2 CH
                                                  COOH
                           N                                                               COOH
                           H                                         N
                                                                     H
                            Tryptophan                                         Histidine




                                            CH3                      NH2
                                                     CH CH
                                            CH3                      COOH
                                                        Valine
Proteins and Amino Acids                                                                                   69


                                          Semi-essential Amino Acids
                                              NH
                                                                         NH2
                                      H2N        C NH (CH2)3 CH
                                                                         COOH
                                                   Arginine




          Amino acids, which are synthesised in the body, therefore non-essential in the diet.

                                                 NH2                                       NH2
                                     CH2                                   CH3 CH
                                              COOH                                       COOH
                                           Glycine                                    Alanine


                                                       NH2                                          NH2
                              HO      CH2 CH                             HOOC     CH2 CH
                                                       COOH                                         COOH
                                     Serine                                     Aspartic acid

                                                             NH2                                NH2
                           HOOC       CH2 CH2 CH                           (SH)CH2 CH
                                                             COOH                               COOH
                                    Glutamic acid                                 Cysteine

                  H2N                                                          H2C        CH2
                                                                   NH2
                           CH CH2     S      S     CH2 CH                                       H
                                                                   COOH        H2C        C
                  HOOC
                                                                                                 COOH
                                                                                     N
                                                                                     H
                                           Cystine                              Proline

                              (OH)HC        CH2
                                                   H                                                 NH2
                                                               OH                    CH2 CH
                                   H2C      C                                                       COOH
                                        N      COOH
                                        H
                                      Hydroxyproline                            Tyrosine
                                                   CHAPTER 7


                      Energy Metabolism


Introduction
What is Energy?
Measurement of Food Energy
Calorie Density
Energy Intake
   Energy Storage in the Body
Energy Expenditure
Measurement of Energy Expenditure
   Energy for Basal Metabolism
   Measurement of Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR)
       Factors Affecting BMR
   Energy for Physical Activity
   Energy for Utilisation of Food
   Energy for Growth and Repair
Total Energy Requirements
Energy Balance
Cut-off Point for Assessing Energy Insufficiency
Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)
Insufficient Energy Supply
    Effect of Insufficient Energy Supply
    Working Capacity
    Wasting of Tissue
    Stunted Growth
Maintenance of Body Weight
Excess Energy Intake
Study Questions and Activities
Energy Metabolism                                                                                      71


Introduction
     Our body needs three inputs to ensure its normal function.
                                    Air (oxygen), Water and Food
     Food supplies the energy components (carbohydrates, fats, proteins), as also nutrients (minerals
and vitamins), which ensure their use in the body.
     In this chapter, we will consider energy, its definition, measurement and balance.

What is Energy?
Energy is the capacity to do work. Energy exists in a number of forms. It may occur as heat generated
by chemical, mechanical or electrical means. Examples are:
       1. Heat produced by chemical means, e.g., when lime and water are mixed.
       2. Heat produced mechanically in the grinding stone when cereals are ground.
       3. Heat generated by electric current for boiling water in a tea kettle.
      One form of energy can be converted to another form.
      In physiology and nutrition, energy is defined as the capacity of a body to do work. Just as a
machine needs fuel to keep it operating, the body needs food to provide the energy to perform its
various tasks.
      The energy released in the body from food is measured as a unit of heat the kilocalorie (kcal). By
definition, one kilocalorie is the amount of heat required to raise the temperature of one kilogramme of
water through one degree centigrade (i.e., from 14.5° to 15.5.°C).
      Some efforts have been made to introduce the joule (J)1 as a unit of energy. One joule is equal to
the energy expended when one kilogramme is moved through one meter by a force of one newton (N).
But joule cannot be used in practical nutrition, until food composition tables are prepared giving the
energy value of foods in joules, and RDA are set in joules.
      It must be remembered that the human body uses energy in many forms hence the unit used in
measurement is only an indirect indication of the energy available to the body in various forms (chemical,
thermal, mechanical, electrical, etc.).
      Food supplies the energy we need for everything we do. Two components of food, carbohydrates
and fats, supply 85 to 92 per cent of the total energy in the Indian dietary, the rest is provided by
proteins.

Measurement of Food Energy
     The energy value of foods is determined in the laboratories by the use of special equipment called
the bomb calorimeter. In the bomb calorimeter, the heat given off by a food in direct combustion or
burning, is measured under conntrolled conditions.
     Energy value of a food can also be measured indirectly by measuring the oxygen used in burning
a known amount of food.

       1. 1 kilocalorie = 4.184 kilojoules (kJ)
          1000 joules = 1 kilojoule (kJ)
          1000 kilojoules – 1 megajoule (mJ).
72                                                            Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      The average fuel values of the energy giving components of foods have been found to be:
                           Carbohydrates         4.10 kcals/gramme
                           Fats                  9.45 kcals/gramme and
                           Proteins              5.65 kcals/gramme
      The energy available from food in the body, called the physiological fuel value, is less than its fuel
value given above because:
       • Some partially oxidised products are excreted.
       • Some food is excreted in undigested form.
      The carbohydrates and fats (after digestion) are completely oxidised in the body, but some partially
oxidised end products of proteins are excreted in the urine. The energy value of these end products on
an average is equivalent to 1.25 kcals/gramme of protein consumed. This figure is derived from a
normal American diet about sixty years back. This correction is made in calculating energy available
from proteins in the body.
      The averages of coefficients of digestibility1 for the components of a typical dietary were:
                                      Carbohydrates                98%
                                      Fats                         95%
                                      Proteins                     92%
      The physiological fuel value (i.e., the energy available to the body) was calculated as follows:
                        Carbohydrates = (4.10) × 98% = 4.01 kcal/g
                                    Fats = (9.45) × 95% = 8.98 kcal/g
                              Proteins = (5.65 – 1.25) × 92% = 4.05 kcal/g
      For practical use these physiological fuel values were rounded off to the nearest whole number to
get the kcalorie values we use in practical nutrition.
                                    Table 7.1: Calorie Content of Dal

             Components                      Dal                Calories per g              a×b
                                              a                       b
             Carbohydrates                   57.6                      4                    230.4
             Fats                            1.7                       9                     15.3
             Proteins                        22.3                      4                     89.2
             Moisture                        13.4                      0                           0
             Minerals                        3.5                       0                           0
             Fibre                           1.5                       0                           0
                                Calories per 100.0 g of Dal                               = 334.9



1. The coefficient of digestibility is a measure of digestion and is calculated as follows
                                                    (Nutrient intake - Nutrient in faeces) × 100
                 Coefficient of digestibility =
                                                                  Nutrient intake
Energy Metabolism                                                                                      73

                       Carbohydrates            4 kcals / g
                       Fats                     9 kcals / g
                       Proteins                 4 kcals / g
      Please remember that these fuel values refer to the edible portion of the food. Thus firstly, the
energy content of the food is related to the food composition. Table 7.1 illustrates how to calculate the
fuel value of food on the basis of composition.
      Secondly, energy value of food is affected by water or moisture content of food, as it is given in
the food composition tables. As you may note from Table 7.2, water or moisture does not provide any
energy. Therefore foods, which have a large percentage of water, have a low calorie content.
      Thirdly, energy content of foods varies with their fat content. As we learnt earlier, fat provides 9
kcals per gramme, therefore foods with high fat content, have a high energy value (Table 7.2).
      Fourthly, the energy value of foods is affected by preparation or processing. As rice absorbs
water, while cooking, cooked rice has about one-third the number of calories as an equal weight of raw
rice. The reverse is the case when foods are dried. Dried fruits are concentrated source of energy as
compared to fresh fruits. Seasoning with oil increases the energy content of salads, vegetables and
dals. Frying foods such as papad, shev, wafers, invariably increases their energy content. Examples of
effect of preparation on energy content of foods is presented in Table 7.3.
      Thus any change in the composition during processing or preparation affects the calorie content
of the food product. It is important to take these changes into account, while calculating the energy
content of food preparations, used in the dietary.
                       Table 7.2: Moisture, Fat and Caloric Content of Foods

      Food                                 Moisture               Fat %            Calories
                                             %                                     per 100 g
      Cucumber                                96                   0.1                13
      Tomato                                  94                   0.2                20
      French beans                            91                   0.1                26
      Orange, Carrot                          88                   0.2                48
      Milk, cow’s                             87                   4.1                67
      Grapes                                  79                   0.3                71
      Potato                                  75                   0.1                97
      Egg                                     73                   13.3               173
      Mutton, muscle                          71                   13.3               194
      Wheat                                   13                   1.5                346
      Groundnut (Peanuts)                      3                   40.1               567
      Butter                                  19                   81.0               729

      Oil, Ghee or Vanaspati                   0                  100.0               900
74                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

               Table 7.3: Change in Calorie Content with Preparation & Processing

                  Food                     Moisture %             Fat %                Calories
                                                                                       per 100 g
      Rice, raw                                13                   0.5                   345
      Rice, cooked                             71                   0.2                   115
      Grapes                                   79                   0.3                    71
      Raisins (dry grapes)                     20                   0.3                   308
      Methi leaves, fresh                      86                   0.9                    49
      Methi leaves bhaji                       80                   8.0                   113
      Papad, roasted                           20                   0.3                   228
      Papad, fried                              3                  26.0                   512
      Bengal gram dal flour                    10                   5.6                   372

      Shev (made from besan)                    3                  38.0                   568


Calorie Density
      The word density is derived from dense, which refers to the extent of concentration of a material
in a particular substance. Thus calorie density indicates the concentration of energy (calorie) in a food.
Fat or foods containing fat have a higher calorie density than those containing carbohydrate or proteins.
If you refer to Table 7.3, you will observe that fried papad is calorie dense as compared to roasted
papad.

Energy Intake
      The main source of energy for all the body activities is food, along with the energy store in body
tissues as reserve.
      Our body needs fuel to carry out its work on a continual basis. This need starts at birth and
continues as long as one lives.
      Energy is the primary need of the body and takes precedence over all other needs. The metabolic
products formed by digestion of carbohydrates and fats, which are simple sugars, glycerol and fatty
acids, provide most of the energy needs of the body. One can summarise the energy production from
foods as:
                         Glucose, fatty acids, glycerol or amino acids + oxygen →
                                    → energy + carbon dioxide + water

      The actual process involves a series of complex reactions, which lead to the common pathway
known as Kreb’s cycle or the tricarboxylic acid cycle, its end products being energy, carbon dioxide
and water. The energy released is trapped in energy-rich compounds (ATP), from which it is released
as required.
Energy Metabolism                                                                                       75

      Food Energy Intake: You can calculate your own energy intake by keeping an accurate record
of a day’s actual food consumption. A sample form given in Table 7.4, can be used and energy value of
foods eaten can be calculated by referring to food composition table in the appendix (Appendix F).
Energy Storage in the Body
      While we may eat two, three or four meals a day, which supply energy to the body at intervals,
our body activities (voluntary and involuntary) go on throughout the day, even while we sleep. The
body draws on its stores of energy to meet its continuous need for energy.
      Glycogen: Glycogen stored in the muscles and liver (about 300–350 g), acts as an energy reserve.
Glycogen stores maintain blood glucose at normal levels for use of body functions during hours of
sleep. Thus our first meal of the day, which breaks the night long fast, is very important for replenishing
glycogen stores.
                              Table 7.4: Record of Food Energy Intake

     List all meals and snacks for 1 day:
                 Food                Carbohydrates             Fat          Protein       K calories
      (description and amount)            (g)                  (g)            (g)

       Breakfast



       Lunch



       Snacks



       Dinner



       Snacks



       TOTAL

      Adipose tissue: Food energy in excess of body’s needs is stored efficiently in the adipose
tissues. This store is larger than glycogen stores. The amount thus stored varies from person to
person. A well balanced amount needs to be maintained as an added reserve energy source.
      Muscle mass: In the muscle mass, a limited amount of energy is stored as protein. This lean
muscle mass needs to be maintained for good health. The body draws on these tissues for energy, only
when it is under stress due to long periods of fast or starvation.
76                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Energy Expenditure
      Our body spends the energy from food and body reserves to carry out its functions related to
maintenance of life and to carry out physical activities. The energy expenditure of adults is decided by
three types of needs for energy: basal metabolism, physical activity and use of food in the body.

Measurement of Energy Expenditure
      Energy expended by the human body at rest or in activity can be measured directly by measuring
the heat evolved. This is known as direct calorimetry, which is easy in principle, but very cumbersome
in practice. It needs a small insulated chamber in which the human subject is kept and all the heat
produced is accurately measured. There may be less than ten such equipments in research laboratories
in the world. Atwater and Ross about hundred years back, studied human energy metabolism, using
such a chamber. They were able to demonstrate that in man.
       1. The fundamental physical law of Conservation of Energy is obeyed. Thus total energy
           expenditure (heat produced + activity done) is equal to the net energy provided by the food
           consumed (total chemical energy in the food – the energy lost in faeces and urine), when the
           person is in energy balance.
       2. Total energy expenditure is quantitatively related to the oxygen consumption in man.
      Total energy spent is quanatitatively related to the oxygen used in the body. The oxygen consumed
when an organic substance is completely used (oxidised) in the body is proportional to the energy
released as heat. Hence the measurement of oxygen consumption by the body can be used to determine
energy spent by the body at rest (BMR) or in various activities. This is an indirect way to determine
energy expenditure and is therefore, known as indirect calorimetry.
      The oxidation of glucose proceeds quantitatively as follows:

                               C6H12O6 + 6O2 → 6CO2 + 6H2O + Heat

      The ratio of carbon dioxide produced to the oxygen used is known as respiratory quotient (RQ).
The RQ for oxidation of glucose is 1.0. Similarly the RQ for protein is 0.8 and for fat 0.7, indicating
that more oxygen is needed to oxidise proteins and fats than that needed to oxidise carbohydrates.
Energy for Basal Metabolism
      Energy needs of the body at rest is called basal metabolism. It can also be aptly be called the cost
of living. A number of processes go on to ensure the continuance of life without any conscious effort.
These include the beating of heart, the circulation of the blood, breathing, the regulation of body
temperature, glandular activities, etc. These processes are known as the basal metabolic processes.
      Basal energy expenditure (BEE) or resting energy expenditure (REE) is the energy used by the
body at rest. The energy used is measured as the basal metabolic rate (BMR) or resting metabolic rate
(RMR). The terms are used interchangeably.
      The basal energy needs account for, about 60 per cent of the total energy requirement for most
people. The highly active tissues (liver, brain, heart, kidney and gastrointestinal tract), which form less
than 5 per cent of the body weight, use about 60 to 70 per cent of the basal metabolic energy. The rest
of the tissues, which account for most of the body weight, need much less energy to maintain their
basal function.
Energy Metabolism                                                                                      77

Measurement of Basal Metabolic Rate (BMR)
      The BMR is normally measured early in the morning, after the subject awakens and is in a post-
absorptive state (10 to 12 hours after the last meal).
      In clinical cases, the normal exchange of oxygen and carbon dioxide in regular breathing used to
be measured with a calorimeter to determine the BMR. The amount of energy used to be calculated
from the oxygen used. This test is used only in research now.
      A number of new efficient tests are used in clinical practice currently. These tests measure the
activity of the thyroid gland. There are several ways of measuring the activity of thyroid gland, which
produces the hormone thyroxine. The blood levels of thyroxine, the hormone which controls the BMR,
can be measured. Iodine is used in the synthesis of the thyroid hormone. Hence serum levels of
protein-bound iodine (PBI) and radioactive iodine uptake tests are also used to determine BMR.
      Basal energy needs can be estimated using a general formula 1 kcal/kg body weight per hour for
men and 0.9 kcal/kg body weight per hour for women.
      The classic Harris-Benedict equations are also used to estimate the basal or resting energy needs
of adult hospitalised patients.
      Female REE = 655 + (9.56 × W) + (1.85 × H) – (4.68 × A)
      Male REE = 66.5 + (13.8 × W) + (5.0 × H) – (6.76 × A)
      Where W = weight in Kilogrammes (kg), H = height in centimeters (cm) an A = age in years
      Factors affecting the BMR: Body size and composition, age and growth, sleep, state of nutrition,
climate and certain ailments affect the basal requirement.
      Body Size and Composition: The heat loss from the body is related to body size; energy needed
to maintain lean muscle mass at rest is related to body composition.
      Original work on energy measurement was based on body surface area. Recent studies have
demonstrated that the metabolic rate is primarily dependent on lean body mass (LBM). LBM can be
accurately determined by under water weighing or total count of body potassium.
      Athletes, who have developed muscles due to exercise, have 5 per cent increase in BMR as
compared to non-athletes. Women have 5 to 10 per cent lower metabolic rate as compared to men of
same weight and height, because they have more fat and less muscle in their body than men do. If BMR
is calculated on the basis of lean body mass, there is no difference between men and women.
      Age: There is a decrease in metabolic energy expenditure of 2 to 3 per cent per decade after early
adulthood, due to the shift in the proportion of muscle to fat in the body. The basal metabolic rate
gradually decreases after reaching adulthood; the decrease is about 30 per cent betwen 30 and 75 years
of age.
      Growth and Repair: The metabolic rate is highest in the stages of rapid growth, namely the first
and second years of life. There is a lesser peak in metabolic rate in the years of puberty and adolescence
in both sexes. Infants may store 12 to 15 per cent of their energy intake in the form of new tissue. The
metabolic rate increases in pregnancy due to growth of the foetus and related increased growth activity.
      Sleep: The metabolic rate falls by about 10 per cent while sleeping as compared to the resting
rate when awake. This is due to relaxation of muscles and reduced activity of the nervous system
during sleep.
      State of Health: The metabolism is decreased due to malnutrition; the decrease in basal metabolism
is proportional to the degree of malnutrition. It is mainly due to decrease in the amount of active tissue
and a decrease in the metabolic rate.
78                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      When one suffers from fever, the increase in temperature of the body increases metabolism. The
increase is about 7 per cent per each degree Fahrenheit above normal (98.6°F or 37°C).
      Hormonal Control: A hormone known as thyroxine, controls the speed of our involuntary
activity. The thyroid gland, situated in our neck, synthesises this hormone.
      If too much thyroxine is released, the rate of energy expenditure is increased; if too little is
released, the energy expenditure is reduced. The basal metabolism may decrease by 30 to 40 per cent
when the synthesis of thyroxine is inadequate. On the other hand, the BMR may almost double due to
a hyperactive thyroid gland. These conditions need prompt medical treatment.
      Luckily for most of us such abnormalities are not very common. Most of us have a normally
functioning thyroid gland and hence a normal basal metabolic rate.
      Climate: Extreme environmental temperatures affect the metabolic energy needs. The metabolic
rate of persons in the tropics is 5 to 20 per cent higher than those in temperate regions.
      In hot climate (if the temperature is greater than 86°F), the metabolic rate increases by about 50
per cent due to increased activity of sweat glands. The increase in metabolic rate due to cold depends
on the body fat insulation and use of warm clothes.


Energy for Physical Activity
      Physical activity is that activity, which we choose to do; so it is also known as voluntary activity.
It includes;
        • the work related to one’s occupation, profession or job.
        • activities related to personal necessities, such as bathing, brushing teeth, dressing, eating,
            washing clothes and utensils, commuting to work, market, etc.
        • leisure activities such as reading, watching television, playing games (badminton, tennis),
            gardening, playing with children, walking, etc.
      The energy cost of some common activities in terms of BMR units is given in Table 7.5.
      Please remember that energy spent in these activities is in addition to that used for basal metabolism.
The total energy needed for physical activities includes that spent in personal necessities, professional
work, housework and leisure activities.
      The additional energy output due to voluntary physical activity varies from as little as 10 per cent
for a bed-ridden patient to as high as 50 per cent for an athlete. Factors, which affect energy need for
activities, are body size, the efficiency in activity and level of fitness of the person.
      Mental work or study does not need extra energy. Similarly, anxiety or any other emotional state
does not increase energy needs, but any agitated movements, muscle tension or restlessness may
require extra energy.
      Typical disposal of food energy is presented in Figure 7.0.
Energy for Utilisation of Food
     Some energy is used to take food into the body, digest it and carry the nutrients to the tissues and
eliminate the waste products produced in the process. This is known as the specific dynamic action of
foods or the energy for utilisation of food.
Energy Metabolism                                                                                   79

           Table 7.5: Energy Cost of Some Common Activities in Terms of BMR Units.1

                                                       Energy cost of activities in BMR units
                   Activity
                                                   Indian data                International data
            Sitting quietly                            1.20                          1.25
            Standing quietly                           1.40                          1.33
            Sitting at desk                            1.30                          1.36
            Standing and doing lab work                 2.0                          1.95
            Harvesting                                  3.6                          3.5
            Hand saw                                    7.4                          7.5
            Typing (sitting)                           1.58                          1.69

            Walking 3 MPH                              3.71                          3.77

      1.     BMR of man = 1.05 kcal/hr/kg and woman = 0.975 kcal/hr/kg.

     The energy required for the utilisation of mixed diets in Western countries is reported to be 6 to
10 per cent of the total energy need. The energy needed for the utilisation of the carbohydrate-based
Indian diet may be lower than that percentage.




                                Figure 7.0: Typical disposal of food energy
80                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Energy for Growth and Repair: Extra energy is needed during periods of rapid growth for the
building of new tissues. These stages of life include pregnancy, early childhood and adolescence.
      The total energy need of one pregnancy is estimated to be about 40,000 kilocalories. In the
lactation stage, the secretion of milk for the infant increases the mother’s need for energy, the additional
need is in the range 700 to 1000 kilocalories per day.
      Infants, whose growth rate is the highest in the entire life-cycle, have been observed to store 12
to 15 per cent of their total energy intake. Adolescent growth spurt results in extra need for energy; it
may be as high as 25 to 30 per cent more than the adult needs.
      Persons, recovering from wasting diseases, from burns, from blood loss, etc., need additional
energy for replacing the tissue damaged or lost with new tissues.

Total Energy Requirements
      The number of calories we need each day is decided by the involuntary as well as the voluntary
activities of our body. The total energy needed for our body daily is the sum total of the energy for
       1. Basal metabolic processes, which are involuntary
       2. Muscular (physical) activity, which is voluntary
       3. Utilisation of food or specific dynamic action of foods and
       4. Energy for growth and repair.
      To maintain daily energy balance, food energy intake must be equal to body’s energy expenditure
in a healthy adult.
      Loss of weight excessively, as in anorexia nervosa, results from deficient intake of food energy
over a long period of time. Treatment consists of counselling about food needs for health, gradual
increase in food intake as also moderate activity and rest.

Energy Balance
      In an adult, a balance between energy supplied by food and the energy used by the body for its
activities, ensures maintenance of ideal weight and good health. Thus underweight and overweight are
states, which indicate the extent of imbalance in body’s energy needs and energy intake.
      Energy balance is the level of energy intake of an individual from food that will balance energy
expenditure and maintain body weight, when he/she is healthy and maintains body weight and has a
body size, body composition and level of activity consistent with good health.
      In growth stages, such as childhood, pregnancy and lactation, the energy requirement includes
energy needed for growth or the formation of tissue or the secretion of milk at rates consistent with
good health.
      The ICMR expert committee adopted the FAO/WHO procedure of using BMR factors for arriving
at the energy requirements of Indian reference man and woman. These BMR factors for Indian men
and women engaged in sedentary, moderate and heavy activity are 1.6, 1.9 and 2.5 respectively. The
energy requirement of Reference Indian man and woman as given in RDA 1990 is presented in Table
7.6.
      For individuals with different body weights, the energy needs can be computed from the above
figures arithmetically.
      Energy requirement decreases with age beyond 30 years, due to gradual decrease in basal metabolic
rate. By 75 years of age, the decrease is about 30 per cent.
Energy Metabolism                                                                                        81

                        Table 7.6: Energy Requirement of Reference Indian

               Sex                 Activity            Body weight                 Energy
                                                          (kg)                     (kcal)
                                   Sedentary                   60                   2425
               Man                 Moderate                    60                   2875
                                   Heavy                       60                   3800
                                   Sedentary                   50                   1875
               Woman               Moderate                    50                   2225
                                   Heavy                       50                   2925


Cut-off Point for Assessing Energy Inadequacy
      During famine and drought situations, scarcity of food and work exists. An individual’s energy
intake can go below the cut-off point. It is important to set-up a cut-off point for energy for determining
the extent of energy inadequacy. The cut-off point derived from weighted average of daily energy
requirement for entire population on the basis of present RDA will be 2,200 kcal. The same cut-off
point can b e used to determine the extent of poverty and energy inadequacy in our population.

Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA)
      The recommended dietary allowances for energy are given in Table 7.7. It may be observed that
in adults the energy intake is related to the physical activity (Figure 7.1). The energy need for pregnancy
                       Table 7.7: Recommended Daily Allowances for Energy

   Particulars                          kcal/day     Particulars                              kcal/day
   Man (60 kg)                                       Infants
      Sedentary work                      2425       0–6 months (5.4 kg)                       108/kg
      Moderate work                       2875       6–12 months (8.6 kg)                      98/kg
      Heavy work                          3800       Children
   Woman (50 kg)                                        1–3 years (12.2 kg)                     1240
      Sedentary work                      1875           4–6 years (19.0 kg)                    1690
      Moderate work                       2225           7–9 years (26.9 kg)                    1950
      Heavy work                          2925       Boys 10–12 years (35.4 kg)                 2190
      Pregnant woman                      +300       Girls 10–12 years (31.5 kg)                1970
   Lactation                                         Boys 13–15 years (47.8 kg)                 2450
      0–6 months                          +550       Girls 13–15 years (46.7 kg)                2060
      7–12 months                         +400       Boys 16–18 years (57.1 kg)                 2640
                                                     Girls 16–18 years (49.9 kg)                2060
82                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

is increased in the latter half when the growth is rapid and some storage occurs to be utilised during the
early part of the lactation for the secretion of milk. The extra energy needs for pregnancy and lactation
are indicated below, as also the energy needs during various stages of growth. In the first year of life
as the growth is very rapid and individual variation in weight is great, the recommendation is made in
terms of energy per unit weight (kcal/kg). The growth rate slows from the second year of life and so
also the energy need per day. The variation in energy needs with occupation and physiological state is
depicted in Figure 7.2.




                1950 Calories       2225 Calories           2875 Calories      2225 Calories


                                Figure 7.1: Energy needs vary with activity.




             Age – 7-8 months        9 years 25 years Sedentary   Pregnant     Moderate Activity
             Calories – 845          1950    1875                 2175         2225
             Body Weight – 8.6 kg    26.9 kg 50 kg                60 kg        50 kg




              Figure 7.2: Energy needs vary with age, occupation and physiological state.


Insufficient Energy Supply
      The effects of insufficient energy supply throughout life may result in low life expectancy. For a
large section of the rural population, who do not get sufficient food, the cause may be traced to too
many persons per unit of family land; poor yields or poor harvests; the landless labour may have no
Energy Metabolism                                                                                         83

work during part of the year. In the cities the causes may be full or partial unemployment or too many
dependents per earning member in the lower socio-economic groups. A small section of the population
may have insufficient intake due to faulty food habits. These may include missed meals, poor schedules,
neglect or poor health practices.
Effects of Insufficient Energy Supply
      The effects of insufficient energy supply vary with the age group affected and the extent of
insufficiency. In adults, it may affect their capacity for work, in children it affects their growth and
activity. If the energy supply is very short of what is needed, the body stores of fat may be used,
followed by use of the muscle tissues to meet the need for minimal function of the body.
      Working Capacity: The energy needs for work are next to the basal metabolic needs in magnitude.
When there is an insufficient energy supply, the body adjusts to the shortage by reducing activity.
      In children, this may result in reduced movement or play, depending on the age of the child and
may pass unnoticed. In adults, it results in reduced activity, slow deliberate movement and avoidance
of continuous effort.
      In a number of studies, dramatic losses in working efficiency have been reported, during periods
of food shortage. In Germany, steel output fell from 120 tons to 80 tons per man per month, when
energy supply for work was reduced from 1900 to 1150 calories per day.
      In India, where about 65 to 70 per cent of the population is engaged in agriculture, it will affect
the agricultural production adversely.
      Wasting of Tissue: When adults have to do strenuous manual work with meagre food intake, the
extra energy needed is mobilised by burning body tissues. This has been euphemistically called ‘wasting
of tissue’. This is what happens to many farm workers who have very little food reserves. When the
planting season comes, and they have to go through the whole cycle of strenuous operations involved
in producing the crop, with meagre food intakes.
      The wasting of tissues is observed in adults in pre-harvest periods in many farming communities.
This population goes through the cycle of want annually. What it means in terms of loss of potential
human resources and human misery is hard to estimate.
      The women folk in these communities, who have the additional burden of child-bearing, are
subjected to greater stress and it is bound to affect the health of the mother and the child adversely.
      Stunted Growth: It has been observed that underfed mothers tend to have smaller babies, who
have very little reserves of nutrients at birth. Inadequate food during infancy results in stunted growth.
      Unfortunately, as most children in such communities suffer from a similar problem, the retarded
growth may not be noticed by the parents. Thus the subnormal may pass for normal growth. This is
not a malady in itself, but insufficient food intake is not only deficient in energy, but in other nutrients,
making the child vulnerable to diseases.
      Any childhood infection such as diarrhoea, dysentery, measles, chicken pox creates a stress and
the body tissues are used up to meet the extra demands imposed by the infection. The child may not
survive, if it suffers from repeated attacks of such infections, in the absence of improved quantity and
quality of food intake.
      Aged persons, in such families may also suffer from tissue wastage, as they are dependent on
their relatives, who are unable to provide food for them.
84                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Maintenance of Body Weight
       Weight is one of the gross parameters of our health. The life insurance companies collected data
about weights for heights of healthy individuals to set-up norms (of weights for heights) to be used as
guides in the medical examination of their clients. The clients, who were overweight or underweight
were found to be greater risks, and therefore had to pay higher premiums. Thus overweight can be a
financial liability.
       A healthy normal person reaches the desirable weight for his/her height by 25 years of age. It is
advisable for a person to maintain that weight throughout life. This is the reason why all tables indicate
desirable weight for height for men and women at 25 years (Tables 7.8 and 7.9).
       When energy intake is equal to body needs, body weight is maintained at a fairly constant level, in
a healthy adult. Thus constant body weight is an index of energy balance in healthy adults.
       Consistent intake of inadequate food, which is unable to meet the body’s need for energy, leads to
use of body fat to make up the deficit and there is loss of weight. An underweight person has reduced
capacity for work, vitality and decreased resistance to disease.
       On the contrary, continuous intake of energy in excess of one’s needs, results in deposition of
fat. If this practice is continued, the gain in weight may be unsightly. Overweight is associated with
ailments of heart, circulatory system, kidneys and diabetes. Please remember that there is no reason for
a person to weigh more when he is 40 than what he weighed at 25 years of age. The same is true of
later years.
 Table 7.8: Males (25 yrs.) Weight for Height for Males and Overweight-Underweight Limits

          Height                Weights1.2            Overweight limit 3       Underweight limit3
           (cm)                   (kg)                  (kg) (+20%)                  (kg) (–20%)
           148                     47.5                      57.0                      38.0
           152                     49.0                      59.0                      39.0
           156                     51.5                      62.0                      41.0
           160                     53.5                      64.0                      43.0
           164                     56.0                      67.0                      45.0
           168                     59.0                      71.0                      47.0
           172                     62.0                      74.5                      49.5
           176                     65.5                      78.5                      52.4
           180                     68.5                      82.0                      55.0
           184                     72.0                      86.5                      57.5
           188                     75.5                      90.5                      60.5

           190                     77.5                      93.0                      62.0

1. Derived from Life Insurance Corporation, Agent’s Manual.
2. Weights have been rounded off to the nearest half kilogram.
3. Overweight and underweight limits are calculated from weight in column 2, by adding or subtracting 20 per
   cent.
Energy Metabolism                                                                                     85

      Table 7.9: Females (25 yrs.) Weight for Height and Overweight-Underweight Limits

         Height                Weights1.2           Overweight limit 3       Underweight limit3
          (cm)                   (kg)                 (kg) (+20%)                  (kg) (–20%)
           148                    46.5                     56.0                     37.0
           152                    48.5                     58.0                     39.0
           156                    50.5                     60.5                     40.5
           160                    52.5                     63.0                     42.0
           164                    55.0                     66.0                     44.0
           168                    58.0                     69.5                     46.5
           172                    60.5                     72.5                     48.5
           176                    64.0                     77.0                     51.0
           180                    67.0                     80.5                     53.5
           184                    70.5                     84.5                     56.5

           188                    74.0                     89.0                     59.0

      1. Derived from Life Insurance Corporation Agent’s Manual.
      2. Weights have been rounded off to the nearest half kilogram.
      3. Overweight and underweight limits have been calculated from weight in column 2, by adding or
         subtracting 20 per cent.


Excess Energy Intake
      Continued increase in weight in a healthy adult after the age of 25, indicates intake of energy in
excess of body needs. The body has no mechanism to rid itself of this extra energy and therefore
stores it in the form of fat.
      The excess intake does not have to be large. It can be as little as 50 extra calories a day, which
when taken regularly, will result in 2 kilogram gain in weight in a year. This gain is not serious in the
short run, but over a decade it adds up to 20 kilogram, which is when it becomes noticeable.
      Most people add weight after the age of 35 or 40 years, because they continue the energy intakes
that they needed at the age of 25 years. But their need for energy decreases with age, due to the
lowering of the basal metabolic rate and perhaps change in the activities from more active ones to less
active ones.
      Most women are less active at this age, as the children are of school-going age and do not need
the kind of care they needed as babies. Both men and women may be more efficient in whatever jobs
they do and may have given up active exercise or sport for sedentary entertainment like playing bridge
or watching television. This is also a stage where people can afford the luxuries of life such as eating
rich and expensive foods. Thus, there is an intake of excess food energy which is not utilised, and is
deposited as fat.
86                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      It is necessary to reduce energy intake to a level lower than one’s needs, to use up the deposited
fat. Exercise in the form of active outdoor games, walking and indoor fitness exercise help in weight
reduction. But it must be accompanied by consistent, regular, carefully planned reduction of energy
intake.

Study Questions and Activities
      1. List the nutrients, which supply energy. Discuss the factors which affect the energy needs
         of the body.
      2. List the amounts, kinds and cost of foods which you include in your daily meals:
         (a) Compare the cost of 100 calories from the various foods such as rice, wheat, dal,
               bread, milk, oil, butter.
         (b) Calculate your energy intake per day.
         (c) Calculate the percentage of calories supplied by foods from various groups.
         (d) What happens if the energy need of a person is not met?
                                                                                  CHAPTER 8


                            Fat-Soluble Vitamins


     Introduction
         Definition
     Nature of Vitamins
     Fat-soluble Vitamins
     Vitamin A
         Functions
         Activity of Carotenoids
         Food Sources
         Human Requirements
         Recommended Daily Allowances
         Effect of Deficiency
         Overdosage
     Vitamin D
         Functions
         Food Sources
         Recommended Daily Intake
         Effect of Deficiency
         Overdosage
     Vitamins E and K
     Study Questions
     Structural Formulae



Introduction
      A number of deficiency diseases plagued people, whose diets were restricted. Thus half the
sailors, in the fifteenth to seventeenth century voyages, died of scurvy, due to lack of fresh vegetables
and fruits in their diets. In Asia, beriberi plagued rice-eating people. Pellagra claimed many lives of
corn-eating population in Southern United States in the beginning of last century.
88                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

        Today we rarely see these deadly diseases in the sections of society, who have varied diets of
ordinary natural foods. But in over 70 developing countries, crores of children still lose their sight due
to lack of vitamin A.
        It was thought that a diet containing proteins, carbohydrates, fats, minerals and water was adequate
to maintain life, until the beginning of last century. But research conducted in the early part of the last
century proved that some vital factor was missing from the diet. This vital factor was given the name
vitamin. Later it was found that there was more than one factor involved.
        Now we know that vitamins are one of the six classes of nutrients supplied by food. They are
required for normal growth and maintenance of all animal life. Vitamins are important for their regulatory
and protective functions. Unlike most other nutrients they are required in very small amounts. But it is
necessary to provide these in the diet because many of them cannot be manufactured by the body. The
lack of vitamins results in definite deficiency disorders, which are specific for each particular vitamin.
        Vitamins have captured public interest in the last sixty years. This may be because they have been
synthesised and marketed by a large pharmaceutical industry. Their efforts have been supported by
medical practitioners and health conscious public. Some people have often been misled into thinking ‘if
little is good, more may be better’.
        Surely vitamins are essential nutrients. We need to understand what they do, how much we need
them and where we can get them. Can we get enough of these in foods or do we need pills to meet our
needs of some vitamins? Most important, can mega-doses of vitamins hurt us? We need sound answers
to these questions.
Definition
    A substance can be classified as a vitamin if it satisfies the two criteria:
     1. It must be a vital, organic dietary substance, which is neither a carbohydrate, fat, protein, or
         mineral and is necessary in only very small amounts to perform a specific metabolic function
         or to prevent an associated deficiency disease, and
     2. It cannot be manufactured by the body, and, therefore, must be supplied by the diet.

Nature of Vitamins
      Vitamins are organic substances, which occur in small amounts in foods. They are necessary for
life and growth. Chemical structure of each vitamin is specific; some like vitamin C have a simple
structure, while others such as vitamin D have a complex structure.
      Vitamins do not provide calories, but are essential in the metabolic reactions, which release energy
from carbohydrates, fats and proteins. Vitamins are essential co-factors in hundreds of metabolic
reactions in the body. They may act singly or in co-ordination with each other. Each vitamin has
specific functions and so one vitamin cannot substitute for another in the body.
      Vitamins may occur in preformed or its active form in the food, or as a precursor compound
which can be changed into active form in the body.
      Vitamins are conveniently classified into two groups on the basis of their solubility into fat-
soluble and water-soluble vitamins. Fat-soluble vitamins include A, D, E and K. Water-soluble vitamins
include the B-group and vitamin C.
      Foods differ greatly in the amount and kinds of the vitamins they supply. Selection and intake of
foods according to the food guide (chapter 14) can help to meet one’s need of the various vitamins.
Fat-soluble Vitamins                                                                                    89


Fat-Soluble Vitamins
       Fat-soluble vitamins can only be absorbed in the presence of fat. Therefore, the presence of some
fat in the diet is essential for their absorption. Fat-soluble vitamins can be stored in the body and hence
occasional intake of very high sources may help the body tide over periods of low intake. The requirement
for fat-soluble vitamins may be met by intake of a precursor or the vitamin itself. Not much of fat-
soluble vitamins are lost in normal cooking procedures.

Vitamin A
      This was the first fat-soluble vitamin to be discovered. It has a number of important functions in
the body. Vitamin A is found only in animal foods, mainly as retinol. Plants provide a source of vitamin
A for animals in the form of orange-yellow pigments called the carotenoids. The chief source in
human nutrition is beta-carotene, which the body converts to vitamin A in the intestinal mucosa during
absorption. The conversion is partial and varies from 25 to 50 per cent.
      Vitamin A activity in foods used to be expressed in International Units (I.U.), with the following
equivalencies:
                 1 IU = 0.3 mcg retinol
                 1 IU = 0.6 mcg beta-carotene
                 1 IU = 1.2 mcg other provitamin A carotenoids
      Now it is expressed as microgram (mcg) of retinol or beta-carotene or retinol equivalent (RE) as
indicated in Table 8.1.
      As, you may have noted, the amount of vitamin ester and carotenoids provided decreases with
increasing weight of the vitamin A compound. About 6 to 12 times weight of carotenoids are needed to
provide one unit RE, depending on the form present.
        Table 8.1: Retinol Equivalents (RE)1 of Vitamin A Compound and Carotenoids

              Compound                             mcg               IU/mcg           mcg/RE
              All-trans retinol2                  0.300                3.33                1.00
              All-trans retinyl acetate           0.344                2.91                1.15
              All-trans retinyl palmitate         0.549                1.82                1.83
              All-trans beta-carotene 3           1.800                0.56                6.00

              Mixed carotenoids4                  3.600                0.28             12.00

1. Sight and Life Manual on Vitamin A Deficiency Disorders (VADD), 2nd ed., 2001, p. 11.
2. Molecular wt. = 286.44; 3 mg = 10.000 IU.
3. Molecular wt. = 536.85.
4. Provitamin A carotenoids other than beta-carotene.

Functions
      Vitamin A has a number of different functions in the body. In recent years, knowledge of the
functions of vitamin A has increased greatly. The Sight and Life Manual on Vitamin A Deficiency
Disorders has updated the information about the major functions of vitamin A.
90                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      It is necessary for normal growth and development. If the intake of vitamin A is not sufficient for
normal growth, the bones will stop growing, before the soft tissues are affected. This may result in
overcrowding of the brain and nervous system, cranial pressure and consequent brain and nerve injury.
In some instances the pressure on the optic nerve may result in blindness. Vitamin A deficiency may
sometimes cause degeneration of nervous tissue without causing bone malformation.
      Function in Vision: Vitamin A occurs in the retina of the eye and is required in the process of
vision to adjust to light of varying intensity (dark adaptation). It occurs in the light receptor cells in the
retina in combination with protein. This substance is known as visual purple (rhodopsin). It is bleached
in the presence of light, which enables a person to see. Some vitamin A is used up in the process. If
more vitamin A is not available, ability to adjust to changes in intensity of light is impaired. Night
blindness occurs in severe vitamin A deficiency; it indicates the inability of a person to see at night,
when the amount of light is far too little to permit adequate vision.




                       Figure 8.1: Current model of the visual cycle (Ranalo 1994).
                                (Sight & Life Manual of VADD, p. 32, 2001)

      The current model of the visual cycle is given in Figure 8.1.
      Health of Epithelial Tissues: These tissues cover the outer surface of the body, line the major
cavities and all the tubular systems in the body. These are specialised tissues, of which the outer
covering is resistant; protective epidermis and the internal tissue is a secretory mucous membrane.
Inadequate supplies of vitamin A results in suppression of the normal secretions and produces a keratinised
(dry, horny) type of epithelium. The skin may become excessively dry and mucous membrane may fail
to secrete normally and hence be prone to bacterial invasion.
      In vitamin A deficiency keratin-producing cells replace mucus-secreting cells in many epithelial
tissues of the body. This is the basis of the pathological process termed xerosis that leads to the drying
of the conjunctiva and cornea of the eye. The process can be reversed by vitamin A. It has become
clear recently that vitamin A mainly in the form of retinoic acid plays a key hormone-like role in cell
differentiation throughout the tissue and organs of the body. Hence the formation of retinoic acid must
be regulated precisely.
Fat-soluble Vitamins                                                                                     91

      Immune Response: Many of the epithelial tissues are important barriers to infection. Vitamin A
deficiency impairs this function in a non-specific way. In addition, vitamin A in a more specific way
helps to maintain the lymphocyte pool. Vitamin A also functions in T-cell-mediated responses. Some
aspects of the immune response, such as immunoglobulin production, are now known to be affected
by retinoids.
      Haemopoesis: Vitamin A deficiency in man and experimental animals is consistently associated
with an iron deficiency type of anaemia. In these conditions, vitamin A is required in addition to iron for
a full response.
      Growth: Retinoic acid is known to play its hormone-like function in control of growth and
development of tissues in the musculo-skeletal system, just as it does elsewhere.
Other Functions
      Energy Balance: It has been recently shown that an enzyme in mitochondria, which controls the
local production of energy as heat is under the transcriptional regulation of retinoic acid.
      Central Nervous System: Retinoic acid plays a major role in the development of the foetal
central nervous system.
      Gap Junctional Communication: Gap junctions are narrow, hydrophilic pores connecting the
cytosol of two adjacent cells. The gap junctions are reported to be involved in regulation of morphogenesis,
cell differentiation, secretion of hormones and growth. Retinoic acid and its analogues act as ligands of
nuclear receptors.
      Activity of Carotenoids: Carotenoids carry out several important functions in animals and plants.
Some carotenoids are only precursors of vitamin A and its derivatives. They act as accessory pigments
in energy transfer in photosynthesis. Carotenoids have a photoprotective role in man and bacteria.
They are also involved in phototropism in simple and higher plant forms and in plant growth regulation.
Carotenoids act in the trapping or tying up of single oxygen. They are used as colouration of food for
mankind.
Food Sources
      Vitamin A is present in animal foods only. Liver is the richest source of vitamin A. Other sources
include butter, ghee, milk, curds and egg yolk. Refined oils and vanaspati are good sources of vitamin
A if these are fortified with vitamin A. These may be fortified with vitamin A to the extent of 750 mcg
(2500 IU) per 100 g. Table 8.2 lists the important food sources of vitamin A (Figure 8.2).
      Vitamin A is not present in vegetable foods, but these foods contain the pigment, beta-carotene,
which is the precursor of vitamin A and is therefore also known as ‘provitamin A’. On the basis of its
chemical structure one molecule of beta-carotene should be able to yield two molecules of vitamin A.
In the body, however, the absorption and conversion of beta-carotene is not that perfect and may range
from 25 to 50 per cent (Please refer to formulae at the end of the chapter)
      Leafy vegetables such as spinach, amaranth, coriander, and drumstick leaves as well as ripe fruits
such as mango, papaya, and yellow pumpkin are good sources of beta-carotene. Generally, dark green
leafy vegetables contain greater amounts of carotene than those which are light in colour (Table 8.2).
      Lycopene, a carotenoid from tomatoes, is an antioxidant. It has the ability to protect against
vascular degeneration, the leading cause of adult blindness. Algal carotenoids lutin and zeaxanthin have
the same ability and are used as food additives. Lycopene is known to inhibit carcinogenesis in specific
animal systems and is expected to have similar protective effects in humans. Lycopene supplementation
can reduce prostrate cancer risk by approximately 45 per cent.
92                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                                  Figure 8.2: Food sources of vitamin A.
                                     * includes beta-carotene
                                   ** Only beta-carotene present
                          *** RDA: Recommended Daily Allowances (of vit. A)

      Large intake of vitamin A in times of plenty are stored in the liver and help the body to tide over
periods of shortage. Similarly an occasional intake of a concentrated source also helps to meet the
requirements for this vitamin.
                                    Table 8.2: Sources of Vitamin A

                                                                       Vitamin A value
                          Food
                                                              Vitamin A             Carotene
                                                              mcg/100 g             mcg/100 g
           Liver, sheep                                          6,690                     –
           Eggs                                                   360                     600
           Butter, ghee (cow’s)                                 600–960                    –
           Milk                                                  48–52                     6
           Leaves:
           Dark green, e.g., amaranth, radish, spinach             –               5000 or more
           Light green-cabbage, lettuce                            –                 750–2000
           Yellow or orange, vegetables and fruits,                –                 665–2740
           e.g., carrots, mango, papaya, orange

           Immature beans and peas, capsicum, tomato               –                     80–595

     Liver oils of shark, halibut, cod and saw fish are some of the richest known sources1 of vitamin
A. However fish liver oils do not form part of the diet and have to be taken as a supplement.
1. Fish liver oils contain preformed vitamin A, the contents per one gramme being 200 to 700 mcg in cod liver
oil, about 700 mcg in shark liver oil and 10,000 mcg in halibut liver oil.
Fat-soluble Vitamins                                                                                    93

Human Requirements
      It is customary to express requirements for vitamin A for humans in terms of Retinol Equivalents
(RE/day) taking into account the many different activities of retinol and the provitamin carotenoids.
Table 8.3 gives RDIs for vitamin A from several different agencies. These were meant to prevent
deficiency and provide a margin of safety.
      However recent evidence has emerged to show the protective effects of increased amounts of
antioxidant nutrients such as carotenoids against chronic diseases. Since these beneficial effects were
not thought of in forming the recommendations, it is usual to advise increase in the intake of fresh
vegetables and fruits.
                  Table 8.3: Recommended Dietary Intake of Vitamin A (mcg/day)*

            ASG **                          FAO/WHO                  USA                      UK
            0–1                                350                    375                     350
            1–3                                400                    400                     400
            4–6                                400                    500                     500
            7–12 years                         400                    700                     500
            10–12 years                        500                    700                     500
            12–15 years                        600                    700                     600
            M 15–18 + years                    600                   1000                     700
            F 15–18 + years                    500                    800                     600
            Pregnancy                          600                    800                  +100
            Lactation                          850               (I half) 1300             +350
                                                                 (II half) 1200

* McLaren, D.S. & M. Frigg. Sight & Life Manual on Vit. A Deficiency Disorders. 2nd ed., 2001, p. 36.
** ASG = Age-Sex-Grouping for FAO/WHO, USA & UK.

             Table 8.4: Recommended Dietary Allowances of Vitamin A (mcg/day)*

            ASG**                                     Retinol                 Beta-carotene
            Infants (6–12 months)                       350                       1400
            1–6 years                                   400                       1600
            7–12 years                                  600                       2400
            13–18 years                                 600                       2400
            Adult Man and Woman                         600                       2400
            Pregnant Woman                              600                       2400
            Lactating Woman                             950                       3800
       * Recommended Dietary Allowances for Indians, ICMR, 2000, p.53.
      ** ASG = Age-Sex-Grouping.
94                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Recommended Daily Allowances
      The daily requirement of an adult for vitamin A is of the order of 600 mcg of retinol or 2400 mcg
of beta-carotene per day derived from foods of either animal or vegetable origin (Table 8.4). The
allowance for infants is 350 mcg (about 1400 mcg of beta carotene). The need increases gradually as
the child grows to adolescence. No increased allowance during pregnancy is recommended but the
allowance is increased to 950 mcg or 3800 mcg of beta-carotene during lactation. This is in conformity
with the FAO/WHO recommendations.
Effect of Deficiency
       The deficiency may result from dietary lack of vitamin A, the provitamin, or poor absorption of
these. The deficiency results in growth failure, affects the vision, the skin and the immune function
adversely.
       The earliest symptom is impaired ability to see in dim light (dark adaptation); the next stage is
inability to see normally in dim light which is known as night blindness or nyctalopia.
       The next symptom is usually dryness of lining of eyelids and eyeball (conjunctiva). A later and
more severe stage of deficiency is xerosis (dryness) of the cornea. The cornea becomes dry and loses
its transparency (xerophthalmia). In the last stage of the disease, keratomalacia, the cornea becomes
soft and results in permanent blindness.
       In early stages, treatment with vitamin A will restore full vision; however, if advanced changes
have taken place, blindness is inevitable. The term xerophthalmia refers to clinical manifestation of
vitamin A deficiency. The skin changes include dryness, wrinkling, slate gray discolouration and
thickening of the outer layer (hyperkeratosis). The hair may lose lustre.
       There is a noticeable shrinking, hardening and progressive degeneration of epithelial cells, which
increases susceptibility to severe infections of the eye, the nasal passages, the sinuses, middle ear,
lungs and genitourinary tract.
Overdosage
      An overdosage of vitamin A may cause serious injury to health. Self-administration of highly
potent concentrates is likely to cause a serious condition from which recovery is slow. Some of the
symptoms of overdosage are irritability, headache, nausea and vomiting. Symptoms subside gradually
on stoppage of intake of vitamin A.

Vitamin D
      Pure vitamin D was isolated in crystalline form in 1930 and was called calciferol. Vitamin D is
now considered a pro-hormone than a vitamin. Vitamin D is sometimes called the ‘sunshine vitamin’
because the body is able to convert a precursor 7-dehydrocholesterol, a sterol present in the skin, to
vitamin D in the presence of sunlight. It can be synthesised in the body in adequate amounts by simple
exposure to sunlight even for five minutes per day.
      Vitamin D activity is shown by a group of chemical substances called sterols, which are wax like
substances. These compounds are insoluble in water, but are soluble in fats. They are stable to heat,
acids, alkalies and oxidation.
Functions
      Vitamin D performs several important functions in the body. These include:
Fat-soluble Vitamins                                                                                        95

        • Absorption of calcium and phosphorus: calcitriol, a hormone, is an activated form of vitamin
          D. It acts with two other hormones (the parathyroid hormone and the thyroid hormone
          calcitonin) and stimulates the absorption of calcium and phosphorus in the small intestine.
          Without the presence of vitamin D formation of strong and rigid bones is not possible.
        • Bone mineralisation: The bone tissue formation from calcium and phosphorus and other
          materials is regulated by calcitriol. It regulates the rate of deposit and resorption of these
          mainerals in bone. This balancing process helps to build and maintain bone tissue. Vitamin D
          hormone can be used to treat rickets in children and osteoporosis (bone loss) in older women.
Food Sources
      Irradiation of the skin with sunlight is the main source of vitamin D. The mid-day sun is rich in
ultra-violet light and helps in synthesising this vitamin.
      Foods are not a good source of vitamin D. It is found in small quantities in liver, egg yolk, milk
and milk fat (butter and ghee), obtained form animals fed on pastures exposed to sunlight.
      The richest source known is fish liver oils, such as halibut, cod, shark and sawfish. Fish liver oils
do not form part of the diet and have to be taken as a supplement.
      Vanaspati may be fortified with 180 International units of vitamin D per 100 g. The per capita
consumption of vanaspati is quite low in India and so the impact of this fortification is limited.
Recommended Dietary Allowance
      It is difficult to set requirements for this nutrient due to its unique hormonelike nature, its synthesis
in the skin by sun’s irradiation of the 7-dehydrocholesterol there and its limited food sources. As the
extent of synthesis of this vitamin and dietary intake is not easy to determine, exact data on vitamin D
requirement is not available. Only a range of values is usually given. About 5 mcg or 200 International
Units1 are stated to be the daily requirement of a child. The requirements for adults may be less but are
not known with any degree of certainty. However, during pregnancy, adequate supply of vitamin D is
essential for the healthy development of the foetus.
      As already said, exposure to sunlight results in the conversion of a compound present in the skin
to vitamin D. Thus a specific recommendation of a daily supplement of 10 mcg or 400 IU per day is
made for only people who work at night, those whose habits or style of dress shield them from sunlight
and for invalids who stay indoors.
Effect of Deficiency
      When adequate quantities of vitamin D are not available, strong and rigid bones are not formed.
This leads to a condition in children known as ‘rickets’ which is characterised by poor growth and
bone deformation such as bowed legs, beaded ribs, enlarged joints and skull deformation. The teeth of
children may fail to develop normally because of poor calcification and may have pits and cracks
which render them prone to decay. In young girls, improper formation of the bones of the pelvis may
result in difficult deliveries of babies, later on in their life.
      Osteomalacia—a condition similar to rickets may develop in adult women due to lack of vitamin
D. This deficiency disease is common in north India and Pakistan especially among women who have
had many pregnancies and have nursed their children for long periods. The bones may become so
weak that they may not bear the weight of their bodies and may bend or break.

1. One International unit (I.U.) = 0.025 mcg of vitamin D.
96                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Overdosage
     Intake of excessive amounts of vitamin D is toxic to the body and causes irritability, nausea,
vomitting and constipation. Even a dose of 1000 International Units (25 mcg), when administered over
long periods of time, has been found to cause toxic side effects in children.

Vitamine E
     Vitamin E or alpha-tocopherol is a fat-soluble vitamin.
     No definite proof of vitamin E deficiency in human beings has been established.
Functions
       The main function of vitamin E, tocopherol, is its ability to prevent tissue breakdown, by virtue of
its antioxidant nature.
       Vitamin E acts as nature’s most powerful fat-soluble antioxidant. In the lipid membranes of body
tissues, the polyunsaturated fatty acids present are easy targets for oxygen to break down. Vitamin E
protects the cell membrane fatty acids from damage by interrupting this oxidation process. It is believed
to prevent the oxidation of vitamin A and carotene in the digestive tract and to regulate the rate of
oxidation of foods inside the body.
       Selenium is a trace mineral that works as a partner with vitamin E as an anti-oxidant.
       There is a paucity of Indian data both on the vitamin E (tocopherol) content of foods and on
vitamin E status. Limited information suggests that Indians have blood levels of 0.5 mg/kg/ml which is
considered as satisfactory.
Food Sources
      The richest sources of vitamin E are the vegetable oils. Vegetable oils are also the richest sources
of polyunsaturated fatty acids, which vitamin E protects. This is nature’s unique arrangement to package
the two together. Other food sources include cereals, leafy vegetables, milk, eggs, muscle meats and
fish.
      Vitamin E is widely distributed in foods. Even the cheapest kind of cereal diet contains sufficient
intake of the vitamin.
      Vitamin E requirement is linked to that of essential fatty acids (linoleic and linolenic acids). The
requirement of vitamin E suggesed is 0.8 mg/g of essential fatty acids.
      Vitamin K: Phylloquinone is the major form of vitamin K found in plants. It is also the form
found in our dietary.
      The basic function of vitamin K is in the blood-clotting process. It is essential for the formation
of prothrombin by the liver. Prothrombin is a normal constituent of the blood and helps clotting of
blood on contact with air.
      Green leafy vegetables are the principal dietary source of vitamin K. Deficiency of vitamin K
prolongs clotting time and may result in excessive bleeding after an injury. Human babies do not have
reserves of vitamin K at birth and in many hospital it is, therefore, routine practice to give vitamin K to
the expectant mother to prevent excessive bleeding at child birth.
Fat-soluble Vitamins                                                                                   97

      The normal formation of vitamin in the intestinal tract is disturbed by the use of sulfa drugs.
Patients, who are treated with antibiotics, after surgery, are likely to suffer from vitamin K deficiency,
due to killing of intestinal bacteria, which synthesise the vitamin. Thus there may be blood loss due to
non-clotting and poor wound healing.
      The Indian RDA committee considered that no recommendation need be made for vitamin K,
since Vitamin K deficiency is seen in India only occasionally in premature newborn infants. It is
suggested that a dose of 0.5–1.0 mg of vitamin K be administered by the intramuscular route to such
infants.

Study Questions
      1. List the fat soluble vitamins and their precursors. What are their main sources?
      2. Explain the role played by
         (a) Vitamin A in vision.
         (b) Sunlight in synthesis of Vitamin D.
         (c) Vitamin K in the blood clotting process.
      3. Why should a overdosages of vitamins A and D be avoided?
      4. Explain what happens when there is a deficiency of vitamin A in the diet.


                              Structure of Fat-Soluble Vitamins
                               Vitamin A (represented by retinol)

                                  H3C            CH3              CH3           CH3
                                                      H                 H
                                            C         C                 C              CH2 OH
                             H2                               C     C       C     C
                                                              H     H       H     H
                             H2                  CH3


                                            H2


                           Vitamin D (represented by cholecalciferol, vitamin D3

                                                                                      CH3
                                                          H3C—CH(CH2)3 —CH
                                                                                      CH3

                                                              CH3

                                             CH2          C         D

                                        A         B
                            HO

                                             Cholecalciferol (Vitamin D3)
98                                                           Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy



                          Vitamin E (represented by alpha tocopherol)
                                      CH3
                                                             CH3
                                                O
                      H3C                                     R
                       HO                            CH2
                                                C
                                                H2
                                      CH3


                                   H                          H                CH3


                       (CH2)3      C        (CH2)3            C     (CH2)3     C     H

                                   CH3                        CH3              CH3

                                                         R


             Vitamin K represented by phytylmonoquinone vitamin K1

                          O
                  H              CH3
                  C
     H
     H                            R


                  H       O



         H            CH3                   CH3                     CH3              CH3


         C    C       C       (CH2)3        C        (CH2)3         C     (CH2)3     C     CH3

         H    H
                                            H                       H                H


                                                     R
                                           CHAPTER 9


                  Water-Soluble Vitamins


Introduction
Vitamin B Complex
    Thiamin
       Functions
       Food Sources
       RDA
       Stability
       Effect of Deficiency
    Riboflavin
       Functions
       Sources
       RDA
       Effect of Deficiency
    Niacin
       Functions
       Sources
       RDA
       Effect of Deficiency
    Pyridoxine
    Folic Acid
    Vitamin B12
Ascorbic Acid
   Functions
   Sources
   Stability
   RDA
   Effect of Deficiency
Study Questions
Structures of Vitamins
100                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Introduction
      WATER-SOLUBLE vitamins consist of a large number of substances. These include ascorbic
acid and the B-complex vitamins. The water-soluble vitamins are absorbed quickly in the body and the
amounts not utilised are excreted in the urine. Adequate amounts should, therefore, be supplied in the
daily diet. Some of the water-soluble vitamins are partly lost in cooking procedures. This factor has to
be kept in mind while meeting their requirements.

Vitamin B-Complex
      A number of substances have been identified and grouped together under this heading. It must be
noted that each of the B vitamins is a separate vitamin in name, structure and function.
      Six members of this group, namely, thiamin, riboflavin, niacin, pyridoxine, folic acid and vitamin
B12 are included in the RDA, because definite requirements of these vitamins have been established
through research. A diet, which provides adequate amount of these six vitamins, also, carries enough
of the other members of this group. All these vitamins are essential for human nutrition. The structural
formulae of the B-complex vitamins and vitamin C are given at the end of the chapter.
Thiamin
Thiamin (also known as vitamin B1 and aneurin) was first isolated in 1926 from rice polishings by
Jansen and Donath. They isolated 100 mg of crystals from 100 kg of rice polishings. Subsequently, it
was synthesised in 1936 by R.R. Williams and is now available in the market in the form of thiamin
hydrochloride.
      The name thiamin is derived from its chemical ringlike structure. Thiamin consists of substituted
pyrimidine and thiazole rings linked by a methylene bridge. It exists mainly in various inter-convertible
phosphorylated forms, chiefly thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP). It is very soluble in water and is readily
broken down by heat in neutral or alkaline solutions.
      Functions: The basic function of thiamin as a coenzyme is related to release of energy from
glucose and its storage as fat, thus it makes energy available for normal growth and function of the
body. Thiamin pyrophosphate, the coenzyme form of thiamin, is necessary for catalysing the oxidation
of carbohydrates in the body. This reaction releases energy in the system.
      Thiamin is needed to maintain normal function of three systems in the body, gastrointestinal,
nervous and cardiovascular system.
      Gastrointestinal System: Thiamin helps to produce energy needed for the cells of smooth
muscles and secretory glands. In its lack, there is lack of muscle tone and deficient gastric secretions;
as a result there is poor appetite, indigestion, constipation and poor stomach function.
      Nervous System: The central nervous system needs glucose as energy source for its function.
When there is a lack of thiamin, the energy is not released and nerves are unable to work, with loss of
response and alertness. The result is apathy, fatigue and irritability. If the deficit continues, nerve
tissues may be damaged causing pain and finally paralysis.
      Cardiovascular System: If energy supply is not continuous, due to lack of thiamin, the heart
muscle weakens and may lead to heart failure. The blood vessel walls become weak, the vessels may
dilate and fluid may accumulate in the lower part of legs.
      Thus insufficient thiamin supply affects the body systems adversely and body function is disturbed.
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                               101

      Food Sources: Nearly all foods, except sugars, fats and oils, contain some thiamin. Plant sources
include pulses, nuts, oilseeds and whole grain cereals. Parboiled rice and fresh peas are good sources
of thiamin. Leafy green vegetables and animal foods such as milk, eggs, fish and meat are fair sources.
      Most foods, however, contain only small quantities and it is necessary to consume a variety of
foods to fulfil the daily thiamin needs. Table 9.1 gives the thiamin content of some common foods
(Figure 9.1).
      The main source of thiamin in the Indian dietary is cereals but refining of cereals reduces thiamin
content with most of the thiamin being lost in the polishing. Chapatis made form whole wheat flour,
when eaten as a staple, provide 50 per cent of the day’s thiamin needs. The dal eaten with it, provides
25 per cent of the thiamin needed. Seventy-five per cent of the thiamin is lost when wheat flour is
refined to manufacture maida. Parboiling of rice helps to conserve thiamin. Thiamin being water-
soluble is also lost, when water in which cereals or pulses are cooked is discarded. Long cooking also
destroys some thiamin.
      Under ordinary conditions of cooking, most of the thiamin losses occur due to solution and not
because of heat-inactivation. If cooking water is not discarded, most of the thiamin (85–95 per cent) is
retained.
Recommended Daily Allowance
      As thiamin is directly involved in energy and carbohydrate metabolism, the thiamin requirement is
expressed in terms of energy intake. Hence the recommended thiamin allowance is 0.5 mg per 1000
calories for all age groups.
                                   Table 9.1: Sources of Thiamin

                                                                       Thiamin
                         Food
                                                              mg/100              mg/unit*
          Pulses, oilseeds and nuts (except coconut)         0.24–1.00            0.06–0.25

          Cereals
            Whole                                            0.20–0.98            0.05–0.24
            Refined                                          0.06–0.12            0.01–0.03

          Flesh Foods
            Pork                                                0.54                0.27
            Liver, sheep                                        0.36                 0.18
            Other flesh foods, fish, eggs                    0.03–0.18            0.01–0.09

          Vegetables and Fruits
            Fresh peas, beans, capsicum and seetaphal        0.25–0.55            0.12–0.27
            All other vegetables and fruits                  0.01–0.25            0.01–0.12

          Milk                                                  0.05                0.07

     * One unit: Amount as indicated in the Daily Food Guide (Table 14.1).
102                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                                   Figure 9.1: Food sources of thiamin.

                     Table 9.2: RDAs of Thiamin, Riboflavin & Nicotinic Acid*

              Thiamin                                                  0.5 mg/1000 kcal

              Riboflavin                                               0.6 mg/1000 kcal
              Nicotinic acid (Niacin equivalents)**                    6.6 mg/1000 kcal

       *   Nutrient Requirements & RDAs for Indians, ICMR, 1990.
                                            Tryptophan mg
      ** Niacin equivalents = Niacin mg +
                                                  60

      There are very few studies of thiamin requirements of pregnant and nursing mothers and none on
the requirement of children. Hence RDA is fixed at 0.5 mg per 1000 kcal and the total intake is related
to their energy allowance.
      The method used to determine the RDA for thiamin combines erythrocyte transketolase activity,
urinary excretion and other findings. The RDA for thiamin is given in Table 9.2.
      Stability: Most of the thiamin is in the aleurone layer of the cereal grain. Using whole grain flours
to make chapatis, rotis, ensures retention of thiamin. Thiamin is water soluble and cooking water
should be retained in the recipe made to prevent loss. It is fairly stable, but is destroyed by alkalis and
prolonged heat. Cooking the food to just done stage and avoiding use of soda in preparation, helps to
retain most of the thiamin in the preparation.
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                                 103

      Effect of Deficiency : When thiamin intake is deficient, the digestive system is disturbed resulting
in loss of appetite (anorexia), poorly toned muscles and constipation. Loss of appetite may be
accompanied by nausea and vomitting.
      Thiamin deficiency can also affect the nervous system. Some of the symptoms observed are
mental depression, moodinesss, irritability, forgetfulness, confusion and fear. Severe deficiency leads
to beri-beri, a disease of the nervous system, which has been known since antiquity. The name ‘beri
beri’ is a Singhalese word meaning ‘I can’t I can’t’, which describes the disease, as the person is
always too ill to do anything.
      Thiamin deficiency is found in association with chronic alcoholism, due to very low food intake
and increased demand. Intake of thiamin restores normalcy.
Riboflavin
      Riboflavin, a more heat-stable factor, was discovered after thiamin. It was isolated from yeast by
Warburg and Christian. Kuhn and coworkers synthesised it in 1935. It was formerly known as vitamin
B2 or vitamin G. The name riboflavin is derived from its chemical structure. It is a yellow-green (Latin
word ‘flavus’ means yellow) fluorescent pigment containing the sugar ‘ribose’, hence the name riboflavin.
      It is less soluble in water than thiamin and more stable to heat, especially in acid solutions. When
in solution, riboflavin is destroyed on exposure to sunlight.
      For example, prolonged exposure of milk to direct sunlight may decrease the riboflavin content of
milk considerably.
      Functions: The primary form of riboflavin is as an integral part of the coenzymes flavin
mononucleotide (FMN) and flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD). Riboflavin functions as a vital part of
coenzymes in both energy production and tissue protein building.
      It is thus essential for tissue health and growth of all animal and plant life (including
microorganisms). It plays an important role in maintaining the integrity of mucocutaneous structures.
      Food Sources: Milk is a rich source of riboflavin. So also are products derived from milk such as
yoghurt (curds), butter milk, milk powder and concentrated milk (Table 9.3). There is no riboflavin in
butter and ghee because the vitamin is water-soluble and remains in the water extract during the
removal of butter from milk or curds.
      Liver and kidney of animals and birds are also good sources of riboflavin. Pulses, green leafy
vegetables, eggs, and meat contain a fair amount (Figure 9.2). Cereals, roots and fruits are poor
sources of riboflavin.
Recommended Daily Allowance
      The requirements of riboflavin have been determined by recording urinary excretion and the
concentration of the vitamin in blood cells. In addition, riboflavin requirement is indicated by the
intakes of riboflavin necessary to maintain saturated levels of the enzyme glutathione reductase in
erythrocytes (EGR) (riboflavin is a co-factor of this enzyme).
      Riboflavin requirement is related to total energy requirements. For practical purposes the general
RDA standard is based on 0.60 mg of riboflavin per 1000 kcal for all ages. Thus the recommended
allowance varies from 0.7mg for an infant to 1.7 mg for an adolescent.
      The need for riboflavin increases during pregnancy and lactation and also with increased activity
and caloric intake. The disease conditions, in which increased riboflavin in the diet is called for include,
104                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

recovery from wasting diseases, convalescence (for rebuilding of tissues), diarrhoea and vomitting (to
make up for poor absorption).
                                     Table 9.3: Sources of Riboflavin

                                                                    Riboflavin
                        Food
                                                        mg/100 g                 mg/unit*
           Bael fruit                                      1.19                     0.60
           Liver, sheep                                    1.70                     0.85
           Dark green leafy vegetables                  0.30–0.47                0.15–0.23
           Milk                                         0.10–0.19                0.15–0.30
           Pulses, whole and split                      0.15–0.39                0.04–0.10
           Nuts                                         0.19–0.97                0.05–0.24
           Other flesh foods and eggs                   0.09–0.44                0.04–0.22

           Cereals and their products                   0.03–0.29                <0.01–0.07

       *   One Unit: Amount as indicated in the Daily Food Guide (Table 14.1).




                                 Figure 9.2: Food sources of riboflavin.
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                               105


      Effect of Deficiency: Lack of riboflavin affects the eyes, skin and nerves. The eyelids become
rough and the eye becomes sensitive to bright sunlight. This condition is called photophobia (fear of
light). The skin changes are found around the area of the mouth, on the lips, tongue and nose. The lips
become inflamed, cracks are observed at the corners of the mouth and the tongue is swollen, red and
sore. These are clinically known as cheilosis, angular stomatitis, naso-labial dyssebacia and scrotal
dermititis. The deficiency symptoms can be corrected by administering riboflavin.
Niacin
      Goldberger in 1915 observed the existence of a pellagra-preventing factor, which he related to B
vitamins. He found that the same factor cured black tongue in dogs. In 1937 Elvehjem and coworkers
discovered that nicotinic acid was effective in curing black tongue in dogs. Smith and others found that
nicotinic acid cured pellagra in humans. Thus a known substance (nicotinic acid) was identified as a
vitamin. Cowgill suggested that the term ‘niacin’ be used for nicotinic acid to avoid association with
the nicotine of tobacco.
      Niacin, the term which includes both nicotinic acid and nicotinamide, is another vitamin of the
B-complex group. The amide is very soluble in water and is the one preferred therapeutically because
it has no side reactions. Both products are stable and are not affected by heat, acid or alkali.
      Functions: Niacin functions in the body as a component of two important co-enzymes NAD and
NADP. The full name is nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide and its phosphate derivative respectively.
These coenzymes are involved in tissue respiration and synthesis and the breakdown of glucose to
produce energy. Niacin works in close association with riboflavin and thiamin in the cell metabolism
system that produces energy. It is necessary for growth.
      Requirements: All the factors, which affect energy needs, influence niacin requirement. Since
one of the amino acids, tryptophan has been shown to be a precursor of niacin in the body, the total
niacin requirement is stated in terms of ‘niacin equivalents’ to account for both sources. About 60 mg
of tryptophan can give rise to one mg of niacin.
      Table 9.4 indicates the niacin equivalents in foods.
      Niacin equivalents are calculated as follows:
                                                                 Tryptophan content in mg
             Niacin equivalents mg = Niacin content in mg +
                                                                            60
      Souces: In plant foods, groundnuts are the best source of niacin. Liver, an organ meat, is a rich
source of niacin (Table 9.5). But both groundnuts and liver are included in the diet occasionally.
Therefore cereals, which are used as staples, are the major source of niacin in the Indian diet, and they
are supplemented by pulses and meat. Unrefined and parboiled cereals retain more niacin than refined
ones.
      Milk, eggs, vegetables and fruits contain very small amounts of niacin. Brewer’s yeast is a very
concentrated source of niacin. It is sometimes added to recipes to increase niacin content of the diet.
Figure 9.3 depicts the food sources of niacin.
106                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

               Table 9.4: Niacin Equivalents in Foods1,2 in 100 g Edible Portion

                                                   Niacin             Tryptophan            Niacin
                  Food                               (a)                  (b)             equivalents
                                                    (mg)                 (mg)               (in mg)
      Cereals
      Rice, raw, milled                              1.9                   87                 3.3
      Rico, parboiled, milled                        3.8                   71                 5.0
      Wheat, whole, flour                            4.3                  133                 6.5
      Bajra                                          2.3                  204                 5.7
      Jowar (sorghum. vulgare)                       3.1                  116                 5.0
      Pulses
      Arhar or tur dal                               2.9                  143                 5.3
      Blackgram                                      2.0                  269                 6.5
      Green gram whole                               2.1                  230                 5.9
      Lentil                                         2.6                  241                 6.6
      Bengal gram, whole                             2.9                  137                 5.2
      Groundnuts                                    19.9                  243                23.9
      Vegetables
      Amaranth, tender                               0.4                   45                 1.1
      Potato                                         1.2                   26                 1.6
      Milk                                           0.1                   62                 1.1
      Egg                                            0.1                  192                 3.3
      Pomfrets                                       2.6                  196                 5.8

      1. Gopalan, C. et al., Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, National Institute of Nutrition/ICMR Publication,
         1990.
      2. Niacin equivalents are calculated as follows:
             b                        mg of tryptophan
         a+     = (mg of niacin) +                      = mg of niacin equivalents.
            60                               60


                                     Table 9.5: Sources of Niacin

                         Food                                       Niacin
                                                       mg/100g                  mg/unit*
                    Liver, sheep                             18                     9
                    Groundnuts                               20                     5
                    Flesh foods**                           3–7                    <2–3
                    Cereals                                 2–5                    1–2
                    Pulses                                  1–3                    <1
                    Brewer’s yeast                           40                     –
           * One Unit: Amount as indicated in Daily Food Guide (Table 14.1)
           ** Includes pork, beef, mutton.
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                                 107




                                   Figure 9.3: Food sources of niacin.

Recommended Dietary Allowance
      Since niacin is involved in the utilisation of carbohydrates, the requirement of niacin is related to
the total calories in the diet. The figure recommended is 6.6 mg per 1000 calories. The total niacin
equivalent required daily on the basis of calorie requirement could range from 8 mg to 26 mg depending
on the age and occupation of the individual (Table 9.2).
      Effect of Deficiency: Lack of niacin affects the skin, gastrointestinal tract and nervous system.
The skin, especially the part exposed to the sun, itches and burns. Lack of appetite in early stages is
followed by diarrhoea in later states. Nervous changes include dizziness, insomnia, irritability, fear,
depression and forgetfulness; later on there may be dementia. The deficiency disease is known as
pellagra which is seen in endemic form in some parts of India, where jowar (sorghum) is the staple
food. Deficiency symptoms can be corrected by administering niacin.
Pyridoxine
      Three naturally occurring pyridine derivatives (pyridoxine, pyridoxal and pyridoxamine) are known
as vitamin B6.
      Functions: Vitamin B6 is a co-factor for several enzymes connected with the metabolism of
amino acids. It is also believed to have a role in the formation of antibodies.
      Sources: Data on the vitamin B6 contents of foods are limited. However, pulses, wheat and meat
are known to be rich sources, while other cereals are fair sources. Vegetables and fruits are relatively
poor sources.
      Requirements: There is some evidence that the pyridoxine requirements may be related to
protein intake. The average requirement for adults would appear to be about 1.5 mg per day. Cooking
losses in normal Indian diets are negligible; hence no allowances for losses need be made.
      The suggested daily intake varies from 0.4 mg for infants to 2.0 mg for adults and 2.5 mg for
expectant and nursing mothers (Table 9.6).
      Deficiency: The symptoms of vitamin B6 deficiency—such as peripheral neuritis, anaemia, glossitis,
cheilosis and seborrhic dermatitis are similar to those of other B vitamins. Hence the extent of pyridoxine
deficiency in India is not known.
108                                                         Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

   Table 9.6: Suggested Daily Intake of Pyridoxine, Folate, Vitamin B12 and Ascorbic Acid

                                                 Pyridoxine           Folate     Vitamin B12 Ascorbic
                                                     mg                µg            µg      acid mg
    Adult man and woman                               2.0              100            1           40
    Pregnant woman                                    2.5              400            1           40
    Lactating woman                                   2.5              150           1.5          80
    Infant:                       0–6 months          0.3
                                                                        25           0.2          25
                                  6–12 months         0.4



                                                                             
    Preschool children            1–3 years                             40
                                                     0.9
                                  4–6 years                             50



                                                                             
    School children               7–9 years                             60        0.2 to 1.0      40
                                                     1.6
                                  10–12 years                           70
    Adolescents                   13–15 years
                                  16–18 years
                                                     2.0               100
                                                                       100   
Folic Acid
       Folic acid and related compounds, which is one of the B vitamins, was discovered in 1941, as a
growth factor for bacteria. It was found to be essential for all vertebrates including man. Its name was
derived from the Latin word folium, which means leaf, because it was first isolated from spinach
leaves and is widely distributed in green, leafy plants.
       Folic acid is pteroyl-mono-glutamic acid. It is quite soluble in slightly alkaline or acid solution; but
is reasonably stable in neutral or alkaline solutions, especially in the absence of air.
       Functions: The primary function of folic acid is related to the transfer of single carbon in the
synthesis of a number of metabolites in the body. It is also involved in the synthesis of nucleic acid
along with vitamin B12. Folic acid undergoes a series of metabolic conversions to its various coenzyme
forms after it is absorbed.
       Sources: It is widely distributed in foods. Green leafy vegetables, liver, legumes and yeast are
rich sources of folic acid. It is a relatively stable vitamin but storage and cooking losses can be as high
as 50 per cent, especially if cooking water is discarded.
       Suggested Daily Intake: The safe level of folate intake would be 100 mcg per day for adults
and adolescents with 25 mcg in infancy increasing to 40 mcg at pre-school stage, gradually increasing
with age to 100 mcg of folates at adolescence (Table 9.6).
       It was observed in one study that the birth weights of infants, born to mothers who had taken 300
mcg folate per day during pregnancy, were higher than those born to mothers who had received 100 or
200 mcg daily. Hence the ICMR suggested intake in pregnancy is 300 mcg of additional folic acid daily.
The additional needs may be met through folate supplements, as it may be difficult to provide it in the
diet. Nursing mothers need additional 50 mcg of folic acid.
       Deficiency: Prolonged and severe folic acid deficiency leads to abnormal formation of red blood
cells resulting in megaloblastic anaemia. It responds to administration of folic acid.
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                                 109

Vitamin B12
      Vitamin B12 or cyanocobalamin was the last member of the B vitamins discovered in 1948. It
contains cobalt and phosphorus and is red in colour. It is found only in animal foods and higher plants
are unable to synthesise it.
      Cyanocobalamin is considered the most potent vitamin and is one of the last true vitamins that has
been classified. It was discovered through studies of pernicious anaemia, a condition that begins with
a megaloblastic anaemia and leads to an irreversible degeneration of the central nervous system. It was
found that the condition could be reversed by feeding afflicted patients large amounts of raw liver. The
active material in the liver was found to be vitamin B12, which is present only in very small amount.
Suggested intakes are given in Table 9.6.
      Cyanocobalamin contains a tetrapyrrole ring system, which is chemically very similar to the
porphyrin ring system of the haeme compounds.
      Functions: It promotes normal growth and development. It helps with certain types of nerve
damage, and treats pernicious anaemia. It is an essential component of several coenzymes, which are
needed in the synthesis of nucleic acids. Its metabolism and use in the body is closely related to folic
acid. It is essential for the normal functioning of all cells, especially those of bone marrow, the nervous
system and the gastrointestinal tract.
      Sources: The richest sources are liver, and organ meats. Milk, eggs, muscle meat and fish are
good sources. Plant foods do not contain vitamin B12. It is not stable to heat and light; hence processed
foods are not good sources. For example, there is 10 per cent loss in pasteurisation and 40 to 90 per
cent loss in evaporation of milk.
      Deficiency: Uncomplicated deficiency is characterised by symptoms such as sore tongue,
weakness, loss of weight, tingling of extremities, apathy, mental and other nervous abnormalities.
When there is a lack of intrinsic factor, essential for the absorption for the vitamin, pernicious anaemia
results, in which there is degeneration of the spinal cord. There is a low level of vitamin B12 in the blood
and an inability of new RBCs to develop normally resulting in megaloblastic anaemia. The condition can
be cured by injecting vitamin B12-intramuscularly.

Ascorbic Acid (Vitamin C)
      Ascorbic acid (vitamin C) was isolated and its chemical structure elucidated in 1932 by C.G.
King. Its lack in human diet has long been known to cause a disease called scurvy. In olden days,
sailors to whom fresh fruits and vegetables were not available for many days during long voyages at
sea developed this disease. It is reported that 100 out of the 180 men who sailed with Vasco da Gama,
died of scurvy before they reached India in 1498.
      Ascorbic acid closely resembles glucose in structure. The vitamin is a white, crystalline, odourless
compound readily soluble in water. It is a strong reducing agent. It is comparatively stable in an acid
medium but is destroyed by the action of heat, oxygen and catalysts such as copper.
      It is now made synthetically and the synthetic product is relatively inexpensive.
      Functions: Ascorbic acid performs a number of important functions in the body. It is a part of
the cementing material which hold the body cells firmly in place. Thus it plays an important role to build
and maintain strong tissues in general, especially connective tissues (bone, cartilage, dentin, collagen,
etc). Blood vessel tissue depends on vitamin C to form strong capillary walls.
110                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Vitamin C is an important partner of protein for tissue synthesis. Naturally it is needed in growth
stages of life. High concentrations of vitamin C are found in metabolically active tissues in the body,
indicating its importance in their function. These include brain, liver, kidney, pancreas, adrenal glands,
thymus and spleen.
      It helps the body to build resistance to infection. It helps in the absorption of calcium and ensures
the health of bones. By aiding absorption of iron, it makes it available for haemoglobin synthesis. It is
needed in wound healing, infections and fever to help recovery.
      Being a strong reducing agent, it helps to tie up free radicals and thus protects the body from their
deleterious effects.
      Sources: Amla (nellikai, also called Indian gooseberry) is one of the richest sources of ascorbic
acid, which contains 600 mg/100 g of the fruit. Guavas and cashew apples contain 200 to 300 mg/
100 g. Citrus fruits such as oranges, sweet lime, grape-fruit and pomelo are also excellent sources of
ascorbic acid. Drumsticks also have a high ascorbic acid content (Table 9.7).
      Leafy vegetables such as drumstick leaves, amaranth, cabbage, which are more frequently available,
are excellent sources of vitamin C (Figs. 9.4 & 9.5).
      Sprouted pulses such as Bengal gram and green gram are good sources and have proved to be of
value during drought and famine conditions when other sources of ascorbic acid, such as fresh fruits
and vegetables are not available.
      Stability: Vitamin C is a labile nutrient. It oxidises easily on exposure to air and heat. It is stable
in acid medium, so acid fruits (citrus) and vegetables (e.g., tomato) retain their vitamin C content. It is
soluble in water and hence cooking water must be utilised to prevent loss. It is not stable in alkaline pH,
so soda should not be added in food preparation to prevent loss.
                                    Table 9.7: Sources of Vitamin C

                                           Vit. C            Vegetables                       Vit.C
               Fruits
                                         mg/100g                                          mg/100 g
       Amla                                    600           Drumstick leaves                    220
       Guava                              210–310            Capsicum                            137
       Cashew fruit                       180–210            Drumstick                           120
       Orange juice                             64           Bitter gourd                         88
       Limes                                    63           Knol-khol                            85
       Papaya                                   57           Radish leaves                        81
       Mausambi                                 50           Cabbage                              55
       Lemon, sweet                             45           Methi leaves                         52
       Pineapple                                39           Cluster beans                        49
       Plantain                                 20           Tomato, ripe                         27
       Mango                                    16           Potato                               17
       Bananas, Sapota                           7           Other beans                          25
       Apples, Grapes                            1
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                              111




                                 Figure 9.4: Food sources of vitamin C.




                            Figure 9.5: Fruit and vegetable sources of vit. C.

      Recommended Dietary Allowance: Ascorbic acid cannot be stored in the body. The requirement
has to be supplied daily. Even if excess is ingested, it is excreted in the urine. The recommended daily
allowance increases with age from 20 to 40 mg for children and is 40 mg per day for adult. An intake
of 80 mg per day is recommended for a nursing mother. The amount recommended is liberal, as
ascorbic acid is a very labile nutrient (Table 9.6).
112                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Deficiency: If ascorbic acid is not present in sufficient quantity, the cementing material is not
formed in adequate amounts. Tiny breaks occur in the walls of very small blood vessels and haemorrhages
result. The tissues of the gums become tender and often bleed. In severe cases, soft tissues around the
joints become swollen and are painful. There is general weakness, lack of appetite and thickened and
scaly skin. Spongy gums and haemorrhages in body tissues are other symptoms of scurvy; these can
be reversed by including ascorbic acid rich foods in the diet.

Study Questions
      1. List the requirements of the following nutrients:
           (i) Thiamin
          (ii) Riboflavin
         (iii) Niacin.
          Do these vary with age? Why?
      2. List the main sources of
          (a) Thiamin
          (b) Riboflavin
          (c) Niacin.
      3. Describe the symptoms of deficiency of
          (a) Thiamin
          (b) Riboflavin
          (c) Niacin.
      4. Discuss the functions of pyridoxine, folic acid and cyanocobalamin in the body.
      5. Discuss the functions of vitamin C.
      6. What are the sources of vitamin C?
      7. Describe the symptoms of vitamin C deficiency.

                              Structures of Water-Soluble Vitamins


                          Ascorbic Acid (Vit C)                 Riboflavin
                              O     C                                  CH2OH

                             HO     C                           (H       C       OH)3
                                        O
                             HO     C                   H                CH2

                               H    C                   C                N
                                                                N
                                                H2C C       C        C       C     O
                             HO     C       H
                                                H2C C       C       C        N    H
                                                        C       N        C
                                    CH 2OH              H
                                                                         O
Water-soluble Vitamins                                                                                     113


                                                       Thiamin Vitamin B 1

                                                              CH 3
                                       NH2            H
                                                              C C        CH2CH2OH
                                       C
                                   N        C         C N
                              H 3C C        CH             C S
                                       N              H Cl H



                                                    Niacin Group
                                 Nicotinic Acid                  Nicotinamide
                                  N                                N
                              H C    CH                          C    CH
                              H C    C COOH H                    C    C CO. HN2
                                  C                                C
                                  H                                H


                                            Vit B6 Group
                   Pyridoxine                              Pyridoxal                   Pyridoxamine
                                                            O
                     CH2OH
                                                       C                                  CH2NH2
             HO               CH2OH                          H
                                                                                 HO                CH2OH
             H3C                           HO                    CH2OH
                     N                 H3C                                       H3C
                                                       N                                   N




                                           Pantothenic Acid
                                H   CH3 OH O                 H       H       H

                         HO     C      C        C      C     N       C       C     COOH

                                H   CH3 H                            H       H




                                          Folacin
                         (represented by monopteroylglutamic acid)
                                                H      H                     H
                         H      H   O                            H       H         N       N
                                                                                                   NH2
                HOOC     C      N   C                            N       C                     N
                                                                                   N
                    H     C     H                                        H                 OH
                                                H      H
                HOOC     CH2
114                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy



                            Biotin
                   O

              HN       NH
         H                    H
                              CH2    (CH2)2 . CH2 . COOH
         H2
                   S        H


                          Vitamin B12
               (represented by cyanocobalamin)


                       CH2 . CONH2
                        CH2 H CH3CH3
                                       CH2CONH2
      NH2CO.CH2    A         B              CH2.CH2.CONH2
            CH3      N CN N
              CH3      Co+
                     N     N
                                            CH3
      NH2CO.CH2   D          C
                                            CH3

        CO .CH2 CH2 CH3 CH3CH2.CH2.CONH2
       NH
       CH2
       CH . CH3
            O    O
               P       N              Choline
                                CH3
            O    O  OH          CH3      CH3 CH2CH2OH
                       N
                 C C                   CH3 N
              H H H
              C        C                 CH3 OH
                       H
        HO . CH2
                   O
                                                             CHAPTER 10


                 Major and Trace Minerals


Introduction
Nature and Composition
General Functions of Minerals
   Bones and Teeth Formation
   Structural Components of Soft Tissues
   As Components and Co-factors of Vitamins, Hormones and Enzymes
   Muscle Contraction and Response of Nerves
   Control of Water Balance
   Maintenance of Acid-base Balance
Dynamic Equilibrium
Recommended Dietary Allowances
Absorption of Mineral Elements
   Favoured by
   Reduced by
Toxicity
Major Minerals
Calcium
    Food Sources
    Utilisation of Calcium
    Effect of Deficiency
Phosphorus
   Body Composition and Functions
   Food Sources
Magnesium
   Body Composition and Functions
   Food Sources
Trace Elements
116                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      Iron
             Functions
             Utilisation of Iron
             Food Sources
             Recommended Dietary Allowances
             Deficiency
             Iron Overload
      Iodine
      Other Trace Elements
      Study Questions



Introduction
      The importance of minerals in our well-being is emphasised by the fact that iron deficiency
anemia is one of the three major health problems in India.
      The increase in the number of fractures in the elderly as also the incidence of high blood pressure
are also pointers that focus one’s attention on minerals, calcium and sodium. A liberal inake of calcium,
with increased mobility and exposure to sunlight is known to improve the strength of bones and thus
reduce their fragility. A reduction in sodium intake can be one of the helpful factors in reducing
hypertension. Though advertisements for dietary supplements may lead you to believe that these may
be the answer to the problem, it is not so. The key is to select foods to meet the body's mineral needs
and to season foods moderately to avoid excess intake of salt.

Nature and Composition
       As you may know from your elementary chemistry course, minerals are inorganic substances.
So far we have studied nutrients, (carbohydrates, fats, proteins and vitamins), which are organic
compounds.
       Minerals are present in all body tissues and fluids. In bones and teeth the minerals calcium and
phosphorus are deposited in protein material. Iron is found in blood as a part of the red pigment,
haemoglobin. Minerals occur in foods as salts and also in combination with organic substances.
       Minerals have two distinct characteristics
         • Mineral elements do not provide energy.
         • Mineral elements are not destroyed during food preparation.
       The mineral elements found in the body form only 4 to 6 per cent of the weight of our adult
body. This means that about 2 to 3 kg of our body weight consists of minerals. Of this 90 per cent is
accounted for by seven minerals (calcium, phosphorus, potassium, sulphur, sodium, chloride and
magnesium). The other minerals are known as trace elements, as these add together to about 10 per
cent of the total mineral content of the body. The mineral composition of the adult body is given in
Table 10.1.
       The largest concentration of minerals is found in the bones and teeth. Minerals are also found in
soft tissues such as nerves and muscles and in blood and other body fluids.
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                          117


General Functions of Minerals
     Some minerals play an important role in the regulation of body functions. These are:
      1. Maintenance of acid-base balance.
      2. Control of water balance.
      3. Contraction of muscles.
      4. Normal response of nerves to physiological stimulation.
      5. Clotting of blood.
     Minerals do not act singly in their function and regulation of body processes, but work with the
help of other minerals and organic compounds. A certain concentration of each element must be
present for efficient functioning of the body.
                    Table 10.1: Mineral Composition of Adult Human Body1

                                                       Approximate amount in adult body
                  Mineral
                                                         60 kg                        50 kg
      Major Mineral Elements
      Calcium                                            1030 g                        855 g
      Phosphorus                                          645 g                        535 g
      Potassium                                           210 g                        175 g
      Sulfur                                              150 g                        125 g
      Sodium                                               90 g                            75 g
      Chlorine                                             90 g                            75 g
      Magnesium                                            26 g                            21 g
      Trace Elements
      Iron                                                 3.4 g                       2.9 g
      Molybdenum                                           2.6 g                       2.1 g
      Zinc                                                 1.7 g                       1.4 g
      Selenium                                             1.7 g                       1.4 g
      Fluorine                                             0.9 g                      0.75 g
      Copper                                            130 mg                       110 mg
      Manganese                                         130 mg                       110 mg
      Iodine                                             26 mg                        21 mg
      Cobalt                                               4 mg                       3.6 mg
      Chromium                                             4 mg                       3.6 mg

    1. Based on Robinson et al., Basic Nutrition & Diet Therapy, 7th edn., p. 151, 1993.

      Some of the important tissue formations and processes in which mineral elements function in
unison are discussed below. This will be followed by a discussion of each important mineral element
and its specific functions.
118                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Bones and Teeth Formation: Most of the calcium, phosphorus and magnesium and small
amounts of other mineral elements are deposited in the bones and teeth. Bones and teeth are formed of
tough protein material into which minerals are deposited. Most of the bone formation (ossification) in
the foetus occurs in the eighth and ninth months of pregnancy. At birth, the bones are very soft, but the
infant has a well formed skeleton. Throughout the growth phases (childhood, adolescence and early
adulthood) the bones become long, thick and increase in hardness.
      Thus bones form an important part of the body framework. Bones also serve as a reservoir of the
component mineral elements. Thus the blood levels of these minerals are maintained by withdrawal of
these elements from the bone. The minerals provided in the diet replace those withdrawn and thus help
to maintain the bone structure. Thus even in bones, there is a continuous process of maintenance and
repair of the tissue.
      In the foetus, the first teeth are formed from fourth to sixth week of pregnancy. By the twentieth
week, these teeth calcify. These are milk teeth and their formation is known as primary dentition.
      Soon after birth up to about third birthday, the permanent teeth are formed, while wisdom teeth
are formed between the eighth and tenth year. Before the teeth erupt, they are fully formed. Tooth
enamel and dentine contain an appreciable quantities of calcium and phosphorus. These are protective
layers of the teeth. As these parts do not contain blood vessels, a decayed tooth cannot repair itself.
Hence the only way to ensure the health of teeth is to take care of the teeth and prevent decay.
      Structural Components of Soft Tissues: Many mineral elements are found in the structural
components of soft tissues. These include potassium, sulphur, phosphorus, iron and others.
      As Components and Co-factors of Vitamins, Hormones and Enzymes: Various regulatory
compounds contain very small amounts of mineral elements as constituents. For example, sulphur is
part of many important compounds such as thiamin (a B vitamin) and coenzyme A. Vitamin B12 contains
cobalt; the enzyme carbonic anhydrase contains zinc and the hormone thyroxine contains iodine. Calcium,
as an activator, is a co-factor in the action of pancreatic lipase. Incorporation of iron into haemoglobin
needs copper, while the synthesis of insulin in the pancreas needs zinc.
      Muscle Contraction and Response of Nerves are regulated by the mineral elements (sodium,
potassium, calcium and magnesium), present in body fluids in definite amounts. These elements regulate
the movement of materials through the cell membrane. Normal response of nerves to physiological
stimuli are also regulated by these mineral elements.
      Control of Water Balance: Sodium and potassium are responsible for the control of water
balance between the inside and outside of cells. This function is dependent on the correct concentrations
of sodium and potassium. Potassium is mainly found in the fluid inside the cell, while sodium is chiefly
found in the fluid outside the cell.
      Maintenance of Acid-Base Balance: It is very important to maintain a constant pH in the body
fluids at all times to ensure normal function of our body.
      The mineral elements are responsible for the maintenance of acid-base balance. The pH of the
body fluids is maintained between a narrow range of 7.35 and 7.45. This function of mineral elements
in maintaining acid-base balance is discussed in detail in Chapter 11.

Dynamic Equilibrium
      As in the case of other nutrients, there is a continuous turnover of minerals in body tissues; they
take up minerals, synthesise new compounds and discharge waste matter. However, the healthy body
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                             119

maintains a very fine balance in all these processes, which is known as dynamic equilibrium. The
levels of these minerals are regulated by hormones.
      There are several ways by which this balance is maintained. One way is to release the mineral
from stores in the liver and bones; the second way is to control the absorption of the nutrient according
to the amount needed by the body and a third mechanism of control is to excrete the excess through the
kidney. The blood levels of these minerals are regulated by hormones.

Recommended Dietary Allowances
      The recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for each mineral element for the adult is given later.
The allowances for growth stages of life are higher per unit body weight than the adult stage. Unlike
the major nutrients (carbohydrates, fats and proteins) which have high bioavailability (about 90 per
cent), mineral elements vary a lot in the percentage that is absorbed from the diet. Thus iron absorption
may be as low as 5 per cent; calcium 20 per cent, while sodium is absorbed almost completely.
Absorption of mineral elements is favoured by
     (a) Body requirement: If the body needs are high, as in pregnancy and growth stage of
         children, there is higher absorption of calcium and iron (up to 60 per cent) from the diet.
     (b) Stomach acidity: Absorption of several minerals, for example, calcium and iron is improved
         by the presence of acid conditions. Thus absorption of calcium in the intestinal tract is
         enhanced by lactose, which is hydrolysed to lactic acid. The absorption of calcium, iron and
         zinc is improved by ascorbic acid.
     (c) Form in which the mineral is present in the food: Haeme iron in animal foods is more
         easily absorbed in the body than iron compounds present in plant foods.
Absorption of mineral elements is reduced by
     (a) Dietary components, which combine with mineral elements to form insoluble complexes,
         reduce their absorption. These components include oxalic acid, phytic acid, excess fibre and
         others. Minerals are also bound by some medications.
     (b) The absorption of some minerals is adversely affected by an excessive intake of other
         minerals. Such a situation arises when supplements of minerals are taken. For example,
         intake of iron supplements hinders the absorption of zinc, while zinc supplements reduce the
         absorption of copper.
     (c) Increased mobility of intestinal track due to diarrhoea, intake of laxatives, etc., reduces the
         time of absorption and hence the amount absorbed.
     (d) Parasites present in the intestinal tract also interfere with the absorption of minerals. Iron
         deficiency anaemia in children is attributed to this factor.

Toxicity
      The possibility of toxicity due to excessive intake of mineral elements from normal natural foods
is very remote.
      Excessive intaker, which can be toxic, is possible only when —
     (a) Iron pills or other nutritional supplements are taken in excess
     (b) errors are made in substituting supplements
120                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      (c) Exposures to toxic levels of chemicals occur in an industrial plant.
      (d) Children consume excessive number of iron pills accidentally.
      Even common salt used in the kitchen can be toxic, if fed by mistake in excess to infants.

Major Minerals

Calcium
      Body Composition and Functions: Bones and teeth contain about 99 per cent of calcium in the
body, in combination with phosphorus, protein and other minerals. These give the skeleton structure
and rigidity. In the long bones, the calcium and phosphorus is stored mainly in the ends (trabeculae),
from where it can be easily taken to maintain blood calcium levels.
      The remaining 1 per cent of calcium is present in the soft tissue and blood and is responsible for
many regulatory functions. These functions, which it carries out along with other minerals, are:
        • It is involved in normal muscle contraction, which includes heartbeat.
        • Control of the transmission of nerve impulses.
        • Maintenance of permeability of cell membranes to permit movement of material in and out of
           the cells.
        • Help normal clotting of blood.
        • Activate action of enzymes, e.g., pancreatic lipase as a cofactor.
        • Ensure the absorption of vitamin B12.
      Food Sources: The best source of calcium is milk. Infants receive an excellent supply of calcium
from their mother’s milk. The milk of cows, buffaloes and goats is rich in calcium. The calcium in milk
is accompanied by a favourable proportion of phosphorus, hence, it is very well utilised in the body.
Milk products such as curd, paneer, mava, SMP, are good sources of calcium.
      The millet ragi and seasame seeds (til) have a high concentration of calcium. Green leafy vegetables
are a good source of calcium, though only a part of the calcium from these is available to the body.
      Fresh as well as dried fish, especially small fresh fish, if the bones are also eaten, provide substantial
quantities of calcium in the diet.
      Besides these, some spices such as cumin seeds ( jeera), coriander seeds (dhaniya), contain
enough calcium to make a contribution, if these are used frequently in sufficient quantity, in the diet.
The food sources of calcium are presented in Table 10.2.
Utilisation of Calcium
       Most of the utilisation of calcium occurs from the small intestine (duodenum and jejunum) as
calcium salts are more soluble in the acid medium there. As mentioned earlier, other factors which
favour the utilisation of calcium are presence of vitamin D, ascorbic acid and lactose. More efficient
utilisation occurs in periods of rapid growth, such as pregnancy and childhood.
       The presence of substances which form insoluble salts of calcium, e.g., oxalic acid (in leafy
vegetable), phytic acid (in cereal bran) and excess of fat in the diet, may hinder calcium utilisation.
Excess of fibre in the digestive tract may increase faecal excretion of calcium, thus reducing utilisation.
       Depending on the body’s need, 10 to 40 per cent of calcium from the diet is absorbed. The level
of calcium in the blood is maintained at a constant level, irrespective of the dietary intake, by the action
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                                 121

of hormones. Parathyroid hormone stimulates the kidney to alter vitamin D to its active form vitamin
D3 hormone, when the blood level of calcium is lower than normal. Vitamin D3 hormone raises the
blood calcium level by increasing its absorption, drawing it from bones and decreasing its excretion by
the kidney. Calcitonin (another hormone) inhibits release from the bone and thus ensures normalcy.
      The excretion of calcium is increased on a high protein diet. If such a diet is low in calcium, it
may lead to negative calcium balance.
                                Table 10.2: Food Sources of Calcium

                                         Calcium                                             Calcium
           Foods                                           Foods
                                         mg/100g                                             mg/100g

       Milk & Milk Products                             Green Leafy Vegetabls
       Cow’s milk                             120       Agathi                                    1130
       Buffalo milk                           210       Amaranth (math)                            397
       Cheese                                 790       Fenugreek (methi)                          395
       Khoya (mava)                           956       Rape leaves                                370
       Skim milk powder (SMP)                1370       Fish & Sea Foods
       Cereals & Millets                                Hilsa                                      180
       Ragi (nachani)                         344       Rohu                                       650
       Amaranth seeds                         510       Dry fish                             500–6000
       Rajgira seeds                          223       Nuts & Oilseeds
       Pulses & Legumes                                 Gingelly seeds (til)                      1450
       Bengal gram whole                      202       Mustard seeds (rai)                        490
       Horse gram (matki)                     287       Cumin seeds (jeera)                       1040
       Rajmah                                 260       Poppy seeds                               1584
       Green gram (mung)                      124       Coriander seeds (dhania)                   630


Recommended Dietary Allowances
      Calcium (Ca) requirement has been measured by long-term balance studies. Such studies among
Western population, whose habitual diet contains high levels of calcium from milk, have indicated a
requirement of Ca of the order of 1 g. However population groups in many developing countries live
on an intake of about 500 mg without any ill effects. Long-term balance studies in such population
indicate that they are in positive Ca balance even on much lower intakes. This is due to the ability of the
body to adapt to different levels of intakes of Ca and maintain a positive balance. On the basis of these
studies the earlier RDAs for Ca were suggested, which had given a range of intakes, as was also
recommended by FAO/WHO.
      In the 1989 revision, the evidence for Ca nutrition status of Indian population was examined, and
it was suggested that the earlier RDA be retained. Instead of a range, a single figure for each group is
suggested as shown in Table 10.3.
122                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      It may be noted that during periods of high demand such as pregnancy and lactation, more
calcium intake is recommended.
      The desirable intake of phosphorus was considered. Since phosphorus deficiency is unlikely in
the types of diets consumed in India, adequate intake of phosphorus may not be a problem. It was
suggested that a Ca: P ratio of 1 : 1 may be maintained in most age groups, except in infancy where the
ratio suggested is 1 : 1.5.
      Effect of Deficiency: Deficiency of calcium manifests itself, only after years of insufficient
intake. When sufficient calcium is not supplied, pregnant women lose calcium from their body tissues
to supply the needs of the foetus. Similarly nursing mothers lose calcium and phosphorus for the
formation of milk.

                      Table 10.3: A RDAs of Calcium and Phosphorus (mg/day)

           Group                                               Calcium          Phosphorus
           Adult Men                                              400                400
           Adult Women                                            400                400
           Pregnancy and lactation                               1000               1000
           Infants                                                500                750
           Children                    1–9 years                  400                400
                                       10–15 years                600                600
                                       16–18 years                500                500

      If adequate calcium is not provided in the diet, during pregnancy and lactation, the bones of the
women get porous (osteoporosis). A large percentage of Indian women, especially form the low
income strata, suffer from osteoporosis. In later years of life, these women suffer from loss of stature,
bent backs, high susceptibility to fractures of hip and wrist. These conditions, are due to loss of bone
mass, which results in bending, and compression of vertebrae.
      In children lack of calcium affects their growth adversely. The skeletal frame does not mineralise
properly, resulting in weak bones, which are unable to support the weight of the body. Rickets, which
is a manifestation of vitamin D and/or calcium deficiency, is characterised by bowed legs, enlarged
joints, beaded rib joints and other deformities. The teeth are also affected in calcium deficiency and the
blood does not clot normally.
      Osteoporosis is a complex ailment. The factors, which contribute to weakening of the bone
structure, especially of senior citizen are:
         • Changes in lifestyle, leading to reduced movement,
         • Lack of weight bearing exercise,
         • as also poor absorption of calcium and phosphorus due to staying indoors (lack of vitamin D
            synthesis).
      The best way to prevent osteoporosis is to maintain adequate calcium intake, physical activity to
reduce loss of bone mass with age and exposure to sunlight to ensure vitamin D synthesis to aid
calcium absorption.
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                             123


Phosphorus
      Body Composition and Functions: Bones and teeth contain 85 per cent of the phosphorus in the
body. The remaining 15 per cent is found in various compounds, which contribute to body function
and regulation. Thus functions of phosphorus are:
       • Body building as an important component of bones and teeth.
       • Fat absorption and transport with aid of coenzyme A and ATP.
       • As a part of DNA (deoxyribonucleic acid) and RNA (ribonucleic acid), which are essential
          for genetic coding and protein synthesis.
       • As a part of ATP (adenosine triphosphate) and ADP (adenosine diphosphate), which are
          essential for energy metabolism in the body.
       • As a component of enzymes needed in carbohydrate, fat and protein metabolism.
       • As a part of buffer salts, which maintain acid-base balance in the body.
      Food Sources: The diet which meets the body’s needs for calcium and proteins will also meet
the body’s needs of phosphorus. Rich sources of phosphorus include milk, eggs, flesh foods, legumes
and nuts. Many processed foods and soft drinks have added phosphates.

Magnesium
        Body composition and functions: Bones and teeth contain 60 per cent of the magnesium in the
body.
      Besides body building, magnesium has three other important regulatory functions. Along with
other minerals, it regulates muscle contraction, regulation of the transmission of nerve stimuli and
activates the function of many enzymes involved in metabolism.
      Like calcium, magnesium is absorbed in an acid medium in the gastrointestinal tract. in fact, they
compete for carrier sites in this process. It is important not to have an excess intake of these elements
to avoid competition in absorption.
      Food Sources: Green leafy vegetables are a rich source of magnesium, as magnesium is a
constituent of chlorophyll. Plant foods are also rich in magnesium.
      As no deficiency of magnesium is likely to occur in the Indian population, no specific
recommendations are made for its dietary intake.

Trace Elements
Iron
      Functions: Though the amount of iron in the body is only about two to three grammes, its
presence is very important. Iron combines with protein for the development of haemoglobin, the red
pigment of the blood. The main function of iron in haeme is to carry oxygen from the lungs to the cells
and to carry back some of the carbon dioxide formed, to the lungs for exhalation.
      Iron is also an essential constituent of many tissues (muscles) and of the catalysts which regulate
oxidation-reduction reactions in the body.
      Iron is stored in the liver, spleen and bone marrow in the form of the protein ferritin. Men have
higher stores of ferritin than women.
      Food Sources: Eggs, liver and meat contain iron in a readily available form. Among the plant
foods, leafy vegetables, cereals such as whole wheat flour, rice flakes, an Italian millet, are good
124                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

sources of iron. Pulses, split and whole, treenuts, bajra, ragi, jowar and parboiled rice are also good
sources of iron. Table 10.4 gives the sources of iron.
                                         Table 10.4: Sources of Iron

                                                                  Iron             Iron mg/100g
                       Food                                   mg/unit 1                 E.P.
      Leafy vegetables, dark green                                2–30                  5–60
      Italian millet, rice flakes, whole wheat flour                   25              10–20
      Rice, jowar, bajra, ragi                                   1–1.5                  3–6
      Pulses and treenuts                                          1–2                  5–10
      Flesh foods (liver, meat), eggs                                  1                2–6
      Other Vegetables                                                  1               2–5

      Fruits                                                            1               1–3

   1. Unit as indicated in Table 14.1.

       As mentioned before, the availability of dietary iron in the body is promoted if it is in a soluble
form. Acidity favours iron absorption by dissolving the iron present. The presence of ascorbic acid
helps iron absorption. A high cereal diet, which has high phytate, low calcium and low ascorbic acid,
tends to make much of the iron present unavailable to the body.
       Utilisation of Iron: Iron needs of the body are met by –
         • Use of iron released from red blood corpuscles (RBCs) over and over again.
         • Absorption of iron from the diet.
         • Use of the stores of ferritin.
       Absorption of iron from food takes place mostly in the duodenum and the small intestine. Only 3
to 10 per cent of iron is absorbed by a well nourished adult. Higher percentage is absorbed in growth
stages and by anaemic persons when need of the body is high. If the body has an immediate need for
iron, it passes directly from the intestine into the blood stream. If the supply of iron is more than what
the body needs, it is stored in the mucosa of the intestinal cells as ferritin. Ferritin is made up of a
protein and an iron containing compound.
       Diet directly supplies only about one mg of iron as compared to the reutilisation of iron from the
breakdown products of hemoglobin which supplies 25 mg. Since most of the iron produced from the
breakdown of iron compounds in the body is reutilised, iron is known as one way element.
Recommended Dietary Allowances
      The Recommended Dietary Allowances for iron is presented in Table 10.5. It can be seen that the
amount of iron needed is greater during pregnancy than any other stage of life. It helps the foetus to
store iron, which last for the first few months after birth. Infants after six months of age, girls and
women, who lose blood in menstruation, need more iron than boys and men of the same age. Persons,
who have suffered blood loss, because of blood donation, surgery or accident, also need more iron in
the dietary than their normal intake.
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                                125

       Deficiency: Iron deficiency anaemia is quite widespread in India, the prevalence varying from 45
per cent in male adults to 70 per cent in women and children. While the main etiological factor is dietary
iron deficiency, folate deficiency also contributes to anaemia among young children and pregnant
women.
       The lack of iron results in anaemia due to insufficiency of haemoglobin, the iron containing
pigment in the blood. Persons lacking iron get tired easily, feel faint due to inability of the body to carry
sufficient oxygen to the cells for respiration. Iron deficiency anaemia poses a serious threat to
         • the ability of children to study and participate in games,
         • the ability of women to face the stress of childbearing and nursing, and
         • the ability of men to work satisfactorily.
       Thus it affects the quality of life of a large part of our population. It is our duty to correct and
alter this situation.
                                         Table 10.5: RDA of Iron

                P articulars                Iron            Particulars                   Iron
                                           mg/day                                        mg/day
             Man (60 kg)                     28             Children

             Woman (50 kg)                   30             Boys 10–12 years               34
                Pregnant woman               38             Boys 13–15 years               41
                Lactation                    30             Boys 16–18                     50

             Children
                1–3 years                    12             Girls 10–12 years              19
                4–6 years                    18             Girls 13–15 years              28
                7–9 years                    26             Girls 16–18 years              30


Iron Overload
      When too much iron is absorbded, large amounts are deposited in the liver, lungs, pancreas and
other tissues. Hemochromatosis is a genetic defect, in which there is excessive absorption of iron
resulting in organ damage and skin pigmentation. It may further lead to the cirrhosis of the liver.
      Excessive iron storage, without tissue damage, results in hemosiderosis—iron storage minus
tissue damage. It occurs when iron supplements are given for long periods even after it is not needed.
Abnormal breakdown of red blood corpuscles (RBCs) can also be the cause of hemosiderosis.

Iodine
      A small amount of iodine is required to keep our body healthy.
      There are about 25 to 30 mg iodine in the body. Of this about 33 per cent iodine is present in the
thyroid gland. But iodine in minute traces is found in all cells of the body. Two hormones produced by
the thyroid gland, viz., triiodothyroxine (T3) and thyroxine (T4) contain iodine. These hormones monitor
the rate of energy metabolism in the body and thus are essential for growth and development.
126                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      A deficiency of iodine is marked by a swelling of the neck with the enlargement of the thyroid
gland. This condition is known as simple goitre. The ashes of dry sea plants, which contain iodine,
have been successfully used as medication for prevention of goitre for centuries in India.
      When mothers suffer from prolonged iodine deficiency, they give birth to babies, who are physically
and mentally deformed.
      The amount of iodine in plants is dependent on the presence of the mineral in the soil. In mountainous
areas like the Himalayan regions, the iodine from the soil is washed away by rains and melting snow.
Plants that grow in these regions are very low in iodine content. Similarly the salts, mined in these
areas, known as rock salt do not contain any iodine. People in such areas used to suffer from goitre.
Goitrous regions of the world are shown in Figure 10.1 But nowadays, the salt is enriched by the
addition of iodine and cases of goitre are not that common wherever such enriched salt is provided.
      The water of the oceans contains iodine. The sea plants and the fishes which feed on it are rich
sources of iodine. Salt obtained from the sea contains iodine. Vegetables which are grown in soils
containing iodine are also good sources of iodine.




                                Figure 10.1: Goitrous regions of the world.

Other Trace Elements
      Besides iron and iodine, a number of other trace elements are required by the human species.
These are copper, zinc, selenium, cobalt, fluorine, molybdenum and manganese. Their functions are
given below.
      Copper is associated with iron in energy production.
      Zinc is an essential part of cell enzyme systems. It combines with insulin to form a storage form
of the hormone. It is important in the immune systems as part of white blood cells.
      Selenium functions as an essential part of an antioxidant enzyme that protects cells and their
membranes against oxidative damage and hence against cancer. In this way it spares vitamin E. It is
also credited as a protective agent against mercury poisoning in animals. Reduced blood selenium
values have been reported in children suffering from protein-calorie malnutrition.
Major and Trace Minerals                                                                           127

     Cobalt: The only known function of cobalt is its association with RBC formation as part of
vitamin B12.
     Fluorine is necessary for resistance to dental caries. It may have a function in prevention of the
bone destruction associated with ageing.
     Molybdenum functions as a catalyst component in several cell enzyme systems.
     Manganese: Like other trace elements it functions as an essential part of cell enzymes.

Study Questions
      1.   What are the distinct characteristics of minerals?
      2.   List the general functions of minerals.
      3.   List the factors which favour absorption of calcium.
      4.   What are the sources of iron in the body? Why is iron called a one-way element?
      5.   Why is iodine important in human nutrition?
      6.   Write short notes on trace elements.
                                          CHAPTER 11
                                                  11


Water, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid-base
                                Balance


Water
   Body Composition
   Functions
   Normal Losses
   Water Balance
   Food Sources
   Requirement
   Problems of Dehydration and Oedema
Electrolytes
Sodium
   Functions
   Food Sources
   Utilisation
   Requirement
   Reduction of Sodium Intake
Potassium
    Functions
    Food Sources
    Requirements and Utilisation
    Deficiency and Related Problems
Acid-Base Balance
    pH
    Reactions of Foods
    Regulation of Acid-base Balance
    Disturbances in Acid-base Balance
Study Questions
Water, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid-base Balance                                                     129


Water
      Body Composition: Water is the major component of our body. If you weigh 50 kg, 31 kg of
that weight is water (Figure 11.1).



                                                                            17 kg. Solid    38%
                               45 kg.                                                      Solid
                                                                            Matter
                                                         28 litres                         Matter
                                                         water

                                                                                           62%
                                                                                           Water




                                          Figure 11.1: Water content of human body.

      Approximately 55 to 70 per cent of the total body weight is made up of water. The percentage of
water tends to decrease as a person gets older. Thus infants and children have a much higher content
of water than adults. Fat individuals have less water than lean ones. Water is an essential nutrient next
only in importance to oxygen. Deprivation of water even for a few days can lead to death.

                                            Extracellular fluid
                                         Per cent of body weight
                                         Average subjects – 20%
                                           Fat subjects – 15%
                                           Thin subjects –25%



                               Skin

                                      Lungs
                                                         Interstitial           Intracellular fluid
                Stomach
                                                       fluid 15% of               45% of body
                                Plasma 5% of           body weight                   weight
                                body weight
                   Intestine




                                  Kidney
                               Skin




                                              Figure 11.2: Body fluid compartments.
130                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Water is an essential component of every cell of our body. There is a variation in the water
content of various tissues. Metabolically active tissues such as brain, liver, blood and muscles contain
more water than bone and fat tissue, which are less active. For example, blood plasma has 90 per cent,
muscle tissue 75–80 per cent and fat tissue 20 per cent water.
      Water holds innumerable body components in solution or suspension. Therefore, it is more
appropriate to refer to these as fluids. The fluids, which exist inside the cells, are called intracellular
fluids, which form about 55 per cent of water in the body. The rest is found as extracellular fluid
(outside the cells). Blood, lymph circulation and interstitial fluid (fluid between cells or tissues) are part
of extracellular fluid (Figure 11.2).
      The fluid balance is maintained between the compartments as also between blood and interstitial
fluid; kidneys are the final regulators of fluid balance.
      Functions : Water serves as a building material for each cell of the body.
      Water is a universal solvent and is able to dissolve all the products of digestion. Further as it is
a constituent of all body fluids, it helps in the transport of the porducts of digestion to the appropriate
organs. For example, blood, which contains 90 per cent water, carries carbon dioxide to the lungs,
nutrients to the cells and waste nitrogenous material and salt to the kidneys. Urine which contains
97 per cent water has all the waste material dissolved in it and the body is thus able to excrete
soluble waste products of metabolism. Water is needed for many chemical reactions to occur in the
body. For example, the breakdown of sugar to simpler substances needs the presence of water. Water
acts as a lubricant preventing friction between moving parts of the body. The body temperature is
regulated through the evaporation of water from the skin and lungs.
                            Table 11.1: Water Balance in a Healthy Adult.

                             Water intake                                   Water loss

                  Water intake — 800 to 1100 ml                         Urine — 800 to 1000 ml

                  Water in food — 600 to 900 ml                         Vapour — 600 to 1000 ml
                                                                            (skin & lungs)

                  Metabolic water — 200 ml                                  Faeces — 200 ml

       Total      1600 to 2200 ml                                            1600 to 2200 ml



Normal Losses
       As depicted in Figure 11.2, kidneys and lungs carry out water from the body. Water is also lost as
perspiration through the skin and as part of excreta from the bowel (Table 11.1). The volume of urine
voided depends on the intake of fluids and varies from 400 to 1400 ml.
       The minimum or obligatory excretion of urine is about 600 ml to keep all the solutes (salt, urea,
etc.) to be excreted in solution. Water is lost as vapour through the skin (insensible perspiration) and
also as visible perspiration in hot weather and after strenuous activity.
Water, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid-base Balance                                                      131


Water Balance
The body normally maintains a water balance precisely, i.e., the amount of water ingested is equal to
the water excreted or lost from the body (Table (11.1). This water balance is maintained even though
the fluid intake may vary widely from day-to-day. How exactly this regulatory mechanism works is not
known; but certain regions of the hypothalmus are believed to regulate the intake. The water excretion
is controlled by hormones.
      Sources: The water we drink as such is the main source from which maximum water is obtained
by the human body. In addition to this, the intake of all beverages and liquid foods that contain water,
contribute water to the system. Certain metabolic reactions carried on inside the body also release
water and this is another source of water.
      In a water balance study it was found that of the total 2200 ml available water in the system, 1100
ml was obtained by drinking water as such, 900 ml was obtained from the diet and 200 ml obtained
from the metabolic oxidation (Table 11.1).
      Requirement: About 1 ml of water is needed per 1 kcal enery intake; thus about 2000 ml water
is necessary when energy intake is 2000 kcal. Infants who have a large body surface area, in proportion
to body weight, need 1.5 ml water/1 kcal energy intake.
      The amount of water needed by an individual will depend on many factors such as the
environmental temperature, humidity, occupation and the diet. In general, apart from water
obtained in the food, an individual may need to drink about 1.5 to 2 litres of water per day. An athlete
or a player, playing a strenuous game such as football or hockey, may lose several litres of water and
dissolved salts during the game and would need replacement early. On the other hand, a sedentary
individual would need much less water.
Problems
      Dehydration: When intake of water and other fluids is less than the body needs, dehydration
occurs. Dehydration is a serious medical problem, which needs prompt attention and remedial
action. Dehydration results from excessive loss of water due to vomiting and/or diarrhoea. Infants
who have a high body water content and high water requirement get dehydrated very quickly, when
they suffer from diarrhoea. If the loss of water and electrolytes is not promptly made up by feeding
beverages such as oral rehydration solution, coconut water, weak tea, lemon sherbet, etc., the infant
may not survive.
      Vomitting due to either gastrointestinal disturbances or any other cause can lead to appreciable
loss of fluid from the body. Excessive perspiration due to strenuous exercise, while playing games
such as hockey, football can result in losses of many litres of water. Protracted fevers can lead to
appreciable loss of water due to perspiration. In all such instances where there is loss of water, it is
important to replace the water and soluble salts lost quickly to maintain body composition.
      Any loss more than 10 per cent of fluid from the body can be serious. Progressively, deprivation
of water can cause poor absorption of food, delayed elimination of wastes, elevation of body temperature,
failure of the circulatory system and malfunctioning of the renal system.
      Oedema is accumulation of excess fluid in the tissues. It occurs when the sodium content in the
extracellular fluid increases due to the inability of the kidneys to excrete sodium. Water is retained with
the excess sodium, resulting in oedema. In protracted protein deficiency, the tissues are unable to
132                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

ensure water balance, and the oedema, which follows, is called nutritional oedema. Other conditions,
which lead to oedema, are kidney disease, cirrhosis of the liver and heart ailment.

Electrolytes
       Chemical compounds, which break up into their constituent ions, when dissolved in water, are
known as electrolytes, because each carries an electric charge. The positively charged electrolyte is
known as a cation and the negatively charged one as an anion. In an electrolyte solution, the total
number of cations are exactly equal to the total anions. Electrolytes are necessary to regulate the water
and acid-base balance in the body.
       Sodium is the principal cation and chloride the anion in blood plasma. The other cations are
potassium, calcium and magnesium; other anions are bicarbonate, phosphate, sulphate, proteinate and
organic acids.
       In contrast, inside the cell, the main cation is potassium and the main anion is phosphate. There is
a strict maintenance of concentration of electrolytes in the fluids inside and outside the cell in a healthy
person. Thus sodium stays mainly outside the cell and potassium inside the cell. Any change in the level
of electrolytes in the blood plasma is an early warning of disorder in the body.
Sodium
       Sodium is an essential nutrient, which participates along with other minerals in many regulatory
functions.
       Functions: The regulatory functions of sodium include normal muscle contraction, maintenance
of normal osmotic pressure, water balance and cell permeability, and transmission of nerve impulses
and regulation of acid-base balance. It facilitates the absorption of sugars and amino acids, through the
sodium pump.
       The adult body contains about 85 g sodium; halt of it is in the extracellular fluid, about two-fifths
in the bone and about a tenth in the intracellular fluid.
       Food Sources: The main source of sodium in the diet is salt. It is used as a preservative in a
variety of pickles. It is also used in processed foods, snack foods such as potato wafers and other
savoury foods.
       Other sodium compounds used in food preparation include baking soda, baking powder,
monosodium glutamate (MSG) (ajinomoto).
       The typical diet contains about 500 mg sodium, when no salt or sodium containing salts are
added during preparation. Most of this sodium is present in animal foods such as milk and meats. Most
of the plant foods, with a few exceptions are low in sodium.
       Utilisation: About 95 per cent of sodium intake is absorbed. The sodium not utilised is excreted
in the urine. Actually the sodium content of the body is regulated by the kidneys.
       Requirement: Dietary deficiency of sodium does not occur in normal circumstances, as common
salt is a very cheap ingredient.
       Sodium, which is available from common salt (sodium chloride) in the diet, helps to maintain the
fluid and acid-base balance of the body. People, who do rigorous exercises or who work in hot places
such as furnaces or mines, lose salt from the body in perspiration and urine, and so need an extra intake
Water, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid-base Balance                                                      133

of salt. Similarly, during the hot weather, when one perspires profusely, extra amount of salt is indiated
in the diet. Deficiency of salt in the diet may cause cramps of muscles, headache, tiredness or sickness.
      Salt may need to be restricted in diets of persons suffering from kidney or heart malfunction.
Reduction of Sodium Intake: Hyperactivity in children has been found to be related to excessive
intakes of sodium from use of processed supplementary foods.
      Intake of salt in diets has increased with the increase in use of processed and readymade foods in
the diet. There has been an increase in the incidence of heart ailments as also diabetes mellitus. Hence
a number of health organisations recommend that most people would benefit by reducing their sodium
intake. Since the taste for salt is an acquired taste, it is possible to modify it.
      An intake of 3 to 5 g salt is sufficient to prepare a palatable diet. The following changes will help
to reduce salt intake:
        1. Do not add salt on the table to foods.
        2. Reduce the amount of salt used in preparation. Try ½ to ¾ amount of the amount used
            earlier.
        3. Use minimal amounts of oil and spices in seasoning food, so that the amount of salt needed
            in preparation will be reduced.
        4. Prepare desserts without adding salt.
        5. Use a variety fo herbs and spices to flavour vegetables, meats and reduce the need for salt.
        6. Use salty foods sparingly, e.g., pickles, papad, foods baked with soda, etc.
        7. Read labels of processed foods to note presence of salt and sodium compounds and avoid
            those with high sodium content.

Potassium
      Potassium is primarily present in the intracellular fluid (about 12.6 g/per kg), so that the body is
able to conserve it.
      Functions: Like sodium, potassium helps to maintain the normal osmotic pressure of the body
fluids and the acid-base balance of the body. It is also involved in muscle contraction and transmission
of nerve stimuli. It acts as an activator of several enzyme reactions in metabolism.
      Food Sources: Potassium is widely distributed in foods. Meat, fish and poultry are good sources.
Fruits such as bananas, oranges, mausambi, lemons and vegetables like potatoes, carrots, leafy vegetables
and whole-grain cereals are also good sources of potassium.
      Requirement and Utilisation: About 3 to 7 g per day as potassium chloride, which is the intake
in ordinary diet, appears to be adequate. About 90 per cent of ingested potassium is absorbed from the
intestine, the rest is excreted in urine.
      Deficiency and Related Problems: Normally dietary deficiency of potassium does not occur.
But persons, who take diuretics for weight reduction, may lose excessive amounts and need to consume
potassium rich foods to make up the loss.
      Severe vomiting, diarrhoea, diabetic acidosis may increase losses and thus precipitate a deficiency.
The symptoms are the same as diarrhoea and need to be corrected promptly to avoid a fatal crisis.
      Abnormal elevation of blood plasma potassium known as hyperkalemia occurs in severe
dehydration and kidney failure, which needs immediate action. Rehydration fluids rich in sodium,
potassium and glucose/sucrose help to reverse the situation and pave the way to recovery.
134                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Acid-base Balance
      pH: The concentration of hydrogen ions in a solution is referred to by the symbol pH. It is the
measure of acidity or alkalinity of the solution. Neutral pH, which is the pH of water, is 7.0. The pH
below 7.0 denotes acidity which increases with decrease in the pH. The alkalinity on the other hand,
increases with increase in the pH.
      The pH of body fluids is maintained in the narrow range between 7.35 and 7.45, which is
slightly alkaline. The maintenance of pH in this narrow range is known as acid-base balance.
      Reactions of Foods: The foods which contain sizeable amounts of sulphur, chloride and
phosphorus, metabolise to form anions in excess of cations. Such foods are potentially acid producing
foods. Acid producing foods include cheese, legumes, cereal foods, coconut, eggs and flesh foods.
      The foods which produce excess cations on metabolism are termed alkali producing foods.
These foods contain excess cations such as calcium, sodium, potassium and magnesium. Fruits,
vegetables, milk, groundnuts, etc., are alkali producing foods.
      It is important to note that the sour tasting fruits (citrus and other fruits) are alkali producing
foods. So the taste of the food is not related to its metabolic reaction.
      The third group of foods which are low in mineral elements are termed neutral foods. These
include sugar, starch, tapioca, oils, butter and other cooking fats.
      Regulation of Acid-base Balance: Mineral elements act as buffer salts, which prevent change in
the pH. In the body the carbonate and the sodium phosphate buffer systems are important in pH
regulation. Proteins, which hydrolyse to form amino acids, containing an alkaline (NH2) an acidic
(COOH) group, are also good buffers.
      Carbonic acid is the main acid produced in metabolism, which is exhaled by the lungs as carbon
dioxide and water vapour. Breathing rapidly and deeply helps us to bring down the increased carbon
dioxide content of the blood.
      This is the basis of for the recommendations for exercises, which make us breathe rapidly and
cleanse the blood.
      Yoga, which teaches us to breathe deeply, ensures that oxygen reaches all the cells. Thus it helps
the process of oxidation, which releases the carbon dioxide to be exhaled. The kidneys are able to
excrete very acidic urine, when excess acid is produced in the body, thus preventing changes in blood
pH. The kidneys act as the last regulators of acid-base balance.
      Disturbances in Acid-base Balance: If the pH of body fluids drops below pH 7.3, it is called
acidosis. When diabetes is not controlled, the patients suffer from acidosis and excrete large amounts
of ketones.
      In severe starvation, the body fat reserves are metabolised in the absence of carbohydrate and
acidosis occurs. In renal failure, acidosis occurs, as the kidneys are not able to get rid of excess acid.
      If the pH increases above 7.5., it is called alkalosis. Any condition which leads to loss of
stomach acid, results in alkalosis. Severe vomiting is one such condition. Another is excessive intake of
antacids such as sodium bicarbonate. Third is loss of hydrogen ions due to renal malfunction.
      Any change in pH needs immediate action to avoid disturbance in the metabolism and restore
normalcy.
Water, Fluids, Electrolytes and Acid-base Balance                        135


Study Questions
      1.   List the functions of water in the body.
      2.   Write notes on: dehydration, oedema, and electrolytes.
      3.   List steps to be taken to reduce salt intake.
      4.   What are the functions of potassium in the body?
      5.   What is pH?
      6.   What is acid-base balance?
      7.   How is the acid-base balance regulated in the body?
      8.   Write notes on: reactions of foods; acidosis and alkalosis.
                                       CHAPTER 12


Nutrition for Fitness, Athletics and Sports


 Introduction
 Exercise for Physical Fitness
 Enjoy your Activities and Exercise
 How to Select an Exercise Programme
 Physical Fitness Movement
 Beginning an Exercise Programme
 Requirements for Moderate Exercise
    Fluids
    Oxygen
    Body Fitness
    Body Composition
 Nutritional Needs for Exercise
     Nutrient Reserves
         Carbohydrates
         Fats
         Proteins
         Vitamins and Minerals
 Exercise and Energy
    Kilocalories
    Effects on the System
    Nutrient Ratios
 Athletic Performance
     Energy
     Preparation for Athletic Sports
        Carbohydrate
        Precontent/Programme Meal
        Nutrition During Performance
 Ergogenic Aids
 Study Questions
Nutrition for Fitness, Athletics and Sports                                                             137


Introduction
      The interest in physical fitness is very high in all the age groups of populations around the world.
It may be to keep fit, healthy and thus improve the quality of life or it can be to participate in athletics
and possible competition.
      Our body composition, muscular ability, respiratory and cardiovascular capabilities are very closely
related to nutrition and exercise. Diet and nutrition does influence performance.

Exercise for Physical Fitness
       Just as eating three meals regularly is a consistent part of daily life, so should exercise be a
consistent, regular part of daily life. In physical education in schools, activities that are appropriate for
life-long participation need to be emphasised. This will ensure physical well-being and optimal function
of the majority of students. Some of them may become athletes.

Enjoy Your Activities and Exercise
      The cardinal rule of our body is conservation of energy. To keep an energy balance in adult life we
need to learn to enjoy spending it. Voluntary exercise is an ideal way to use energy, as it helps us to stay
in shape and look good. It helps to improve posture, build muscle strength and increases flexibility of
joints. It strengthens the heart (a vital muscle) and improves circulation, which we refer to as the pink
glow of health. Naturally it relieves tension and helps us to enjoy life. The reduced risk of contracting
chronic diseases is an added bonus.

How to Select an Exercise Programme
      The choice of an exercise programme varies from individual to individual. The word choice is
very important for there are literally innumerable ways to attain your goal of fitness. The following are
the guidelines to choose it:
       1. Choose an exercise you like so that you will enjoy doing it.
       2. Choose one that can be done in all seasons.
       3. Choose one that can be done preferably near your residence.
       4. Choose one for which you have facilities.
       5. Choose one that can be done regularly.
       6. Choose an exercise that involves the large muscles in the body.

Physical Fitness Movement
      The awareness about and interest in physical fitness is increasing in our people. It appears it is no
longer a fad but a welcome trend. The longer one follows some type of regular exercise, the more
committed one becomes. Walking and soft workouts have enabled more persons to participate, who
are not athletically inclined. Many of these persons are middle-aged adults who control health problems
with moderate exercise. They thus feel more in control of their lives.
138                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Beginning an Exercise Programme
      It is important to begin an exercise programme with a proper plan. Strong motivation is necessary
to pursue an exercise programme on a long-term basis. Some of the basic guidelines for beginning are:
       1. Record weight, height, chest, waist and hip girth.
       2. Initiate the programme gradually. As little as 3 to 5 minutes may suffice, for those who have
             been sedentary, especially older persons. Increase the period to 20 to 30 minutes over 3 to 4
             weeks.
       3. 3 to 5 minutes warm-up period, which consists of smooth, stretching exercises, should
             precede intense exercise. At the end of intense exercise, decrease the intensity slowly to
             allow the body to cool down.
       4. Aerobic exercises are most helpful to increase physical fitness.
       5. Persons, who have chronic ailment or are overweight, should consult their doctor and
             check blood pressure, cardiovascular function, muscle and joint function before starting.
             The doctor may help to select the exercise programme and goals to be set.

Requirements for Moderate Exercise
Fluids and Oxygen
      Fluids: More water is needed with increase in exercise. The need to replace fluid losses during
exercise is well recorded. All cellular activities take place in an aqueous medium. Water carries nutrients
and waste products via blood stream to and from the cells. Thus sufficient blood volume is a must
to ensure loss of heat produced through skin and sweat. Water is lost from the body through sweat and
respiration. Water for sweat is taken from blood, resulting in reduced blood volume, which may endanger
heart function. Significant fluid losses may reduce sweating and blood flow, disturbing body temperature
regulation. A water loss of 4 to 5 per cent reduces work capacity by 20 to 30 per cent; a 10 per cent
loss may result in circulatory collapse.
      The fluid losses in exercise depend on the duration and intensity of exercise as also the ambient
temperature and humidity. Normal sweat production, without exercise, is 500 to 700 ml per day. It may
increase to 8 to 12 litres per day with prolonged exercise in humid conditions.
      Electrolytes: Though sweat contains electrolytes, chloride, magnesium and potassium,
performance is not disturbed by electrolyte losses. In hot months, during training, a dilute salt solution
(1/2 teaspoon salt per liter) may be used as a rehydration drink to correct excessive sweat losses
(American College of Sports Medicine, 1984).
      During exercise, as heat is released with energy production, the body temperature rises. One
sweats in an effort to control body temperature. The loss of water due to sweat must be made up to
avoid dehydration. The amount of water needed in hot summer months is much more than in cool
weather.
      Oxygen: Breathing ensures a constant supply of oxygen to the body. The need for oxygen
increases with exercise, as more oxygen is needed to release extra body energy. The ability of the body
to provide the oxygen needed is known as aerobic capacity. The aerobic capacity is dependent on the
fitness of tissues involved in oxygen intake and transport — lungs, heart and blood vessels and the
body composition.
Nutrition for Fitness, Athletics and Sports                                                              139

      Body Fitness is measured in terms of aerobic capacity. Aerobic capacity is the ability of the body
to provide the increased demands for oxygen and use it during exercise. As it varies with the body size,
it is measured as the amount of oxygen consumed per kilogram body weight. Thus it is an indirect
measure of the health of the respiratory system.
      Body Composition: As mentioned in the energy balance chapter, the muscle mass (lean body
mass or the active metabolic tissues) in the body uses larger part of the oxygen. The aerobic capacity
is dependent on the percentage of lean body mass and body fat. Body composition is determined by
these two components of body weight.

Nutritional Needs for Exercise
Nutrient Reserves
       Any exercise activity increases energy expenditure. Proper diet is an essential prerequisite for
good performance be it for athletic competition or for just keeping fit. It is important to have nutrient
reserves to meet the demands during periods of exercise. If the reserves are used up, the body cannot
meet its needs and fatigue and exhaustion may occur. As we know, carbohydrates and fats are the
basic suppliers of these energy reserves, as very little is drawn from protein.
       Carbohydrate is the major nutrient to provide energy for exercise. Our body has two sources of
carbohydrate reserves—the glucose in the circulating blood and the glycogen, stored in muscles and
liver. For an active person, the diet needs to provide 55 to 60 per cent of total dietary calories in the
form of complex carbohydrates as they break down more slowly and help maintain blood sugar levels
more evenly. Secondly, starches are more readily converted to glycogen to maintain this reserve store.
       Fat: There is no basis for increasing the level of fat in the diet. The total fat should not exceed 20
to 25 per cent of the total dietary calories. Vegetable oils, which are rich sources of essential fatty acids,
should form a part of the total fat intake.
       Protein: It is important to meet one’s recommended dietary allowance (RDA) for protein. This
adds up to about 10 to 15 per cent of the total calories from protein. No additional protein is needed, as
it is not meant to serve as an energy source.
       Vitamins and Minerals: They are essential only in the process of energy release as co-factors.
In general, the efficient use of vitamins and minerals by the body is increased due to exercise. Hence
exercise per se does not increase the need for vitamins and minerals.
       The athletes, who need more energy, take larger amounts of good food, which increases their
intake of vitamins and minerals. The only groups that need to focus special attention in this respect are
adolescent and female athletes, who may need iron supplements, if their blood iron levels are very low.

Exercise and Energy
     Kilocalories: Physcial activity needs energy, i.e., kilocalories. The energy needed for various
exercises is given in Table 12.1.
     The amount of energy used in exercise varies with —
     (a) the intensity of the exercise
     (b) the duration of the exercise
     (c) the sex, age, weight of the individual
140                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      (d) the state of the individual and
      (e) the level of training.
      In addition, it is affected by the rest taken during the exercise and the environmental conditions,
such as temperature, humidity, the surfaces involved, the obstacles or physical difficulties, etc. (such
as hilly terrain during cross country running).
      Effects on the System. The need for calories is increased. Exercise helps to regulate appetite.
Exercise is the only way to regulate the person’s body system and to regulate the body fat content.
Lack of exercise tends to raise the body’s fat set-point, resulting in more fat stores. It is lowered when
a person exercises regularly.
             Table 12.1: Approximate Energy Expenditure in Some Aerobic Activities1

                                                                      Kilocalories per hour
                             Activity
                                                                Male (60 kg)          Female (50 kg)
         Sitting, inactive                                           66                      55
         Walking, moderate                                           167                    139
         Walking, brisk (5.6 km/hr)                                  281                    235
         Bicycling (8.8 km/hr)                                       198                    165
         Bicycling (16.0 km/hr)                                      449                    374
         Dancing (moderate)                                          220                    183
         Golf                                                        277                    231
         Swimming, moderate                                          290                    242
         Swimming, vigorous                                          537                    447
         Tennis, singles                                             396                    330

         Runnings (8.8 km/hr)                                        519                    433

      1. Modified from Robinson, et al., Basic Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 7th edn., 1993, p. 128.

     Nutrient Ratios: As mentioned earlier, active persons, even athletes or any other sports persons
need the same amount of protein and fat as an inactive person of the same body size.
     Complex carbohydrates are the fuel of choice before the exercise period and during the recovery
period, which follows. The recommended ratios of energy nutrients to support physical activity are:
                             Carbohydrates         :      60 to 70% of total kilocalories
                             Fats                  :      20 to 25% of total kilocalories
                             Proteins              :      10 to 15% of total kilocalories
Nutrition for Fitness, Athletics and Sports                                                             141


Athletic Performance
      Nutritional well-being is important for all physical activities. Just as we save money, when we
intend to take a trip, so must our body stock reserve fuel before participating in athletic and sports
activities. Many school children, high school and college students take part in competitive games, even
endurance races. Therefore, they need to know the dietary input that helps to improve their performance.
Table 12.1 gives approximate energy expenditure in some aerobic activities.
      Energy: Athletes may need 3000 to 5000 kcal for most sports. Children and teenagers need
adequate energy to ensure normal growth and additional energy to meet needs during training and
contests. Athletes gain unnecessary weight when they are not training or participating due to not
reducing energy intake to sedentary levels. This is true of dancers, soldiers, mountain climbers and
others, whose extra energy need for their professional activity is periodical.
Preparation for Athletics/Sports
      Carbohydrate: There is need to increase muscle glycogen stores prior to the competition. This
is known as carbohydrate loading. The carbohydrate intake (mainly starch from grains) is increased
slowly in the week before the event, beginning with 350g and increasing it to 450 to 500g in four days.
The day before the event the intake is reduced to normal, and complete rest is recommended for the
day. Carbohydrate loading is used only by persons engaged in endurance activities such as marathons,
long distance running, cycling, walking, swimming and cross-country skiing. Those involved in short
intense activities may find carbohydrate loading a hindrance to their performance, as it leads to a feeling
of heaviness, due to water retention. Children and teenagers should not attempt carbohydrate loading.
Even athletes should restrict it to three or four times in a year.
      Precontest/Pregame Meal: Eat a light meal of about 300 kcal, two to four hours before the
game/contest. It should be mainly cereal preparation, which is high in complex carbohydrate, low in
protein, with little fat or fibre in it. This permits the body to digest and absorb and store it as glycogen.
Foods, which one can choose from, include pohe with toned milk or curds, chapati and dal; idli-
sambar, upma, bread, bhakri-zunka, etc.
Nutrition During Performance
      The fluid and nutrient needs during a contest/game depends on the intensity and duration, as also
ambient temperature and humidity.
      The athlete cannot depend on thirst to meet fluid needs. The athlete should drink 400 to 500 ml
cool water two hours before the competition, another 400 to 500 ml 15 minutes before the event. He/
she should drink 100 to 150 ml every 20 minutes, depending on the event and climate. He/she should
continue to drink fluids after the event until the preevent weight is restored. Plain cold water is normally
the fluid of choice to ensure rehydration, except for endurance competitions or training rounds.

Ergogenic Aids
      Winning is the aim of all competitors in sports. Naturally they would like to use any substance
that can aid their activity. These substances are known as ergogenic (work producing) aids. Most of
these are worthless, except the steroids. The consumption of steroids is dangerous. These steroids are
synthetic sex hormones. They have two functions:
      (a) Tissue growth (anabolic) and
      (b) Masculinisation (androgenic).
142                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      These are used to increase muscle size, strength and performance. Athletes often take these in
mega doses of 10 to 20 times that of normal body production. It is illegal to use steroids and those
who use these are disqualified from participating in Olympic games.
      The use of steroids is undesirable as it affects the health of the athlete adversely. The undesirable
physiological effects include stunting normal skeletal development, liver injury, damaging the
heart, sterility and many more. The steroid user undergoes undesirable changes in his/her personality
such as being too aggressive, mood swings from depression to violent rage, etc. Becoming drug
dependent can be a serious handicap to normal life and health. In view of these long-term harmful
effects, sports persons should shun the use of hormones as aids to boost their performance. The adults
who guide them — their parents, teachers, trainers and others — must ensure that the youngsters are
encouraged to develop long-term goals for a healthy competition and life-long health rather than succumb
to short-terms fame, followed by loss of health, unhappy disposition and loss of normal, dignified
human existence. The aim of sports is to improve one’s physical, social and ethical standards. This
basic principle must guide all athletes and sportsmen.

Study Questions
      1. How should you select an exercise programme?
      2. Write short notes on:
           (i) Basic guidelines to begin an exercise programme.
          (ii) Body’s needs during exercise.
         (iii) Nutritional needs for exercise.
         (iv) Preparation for participation in athletics.
          (v) Ergogenic aids and their effects on the body.
                                                                                  CHAPTER 13


                           Disorders of Nutrition


     Introduction
     Protein-Energy Malnutrition (PEM)
         Kwashiorkor
         Marasmus
     Prevention of PEM through Dietary Management
     Vitamin A Deficiency
     Iron Deficiency Anaemia
     Vitamin B-Complex Deficiency
     Iodine Deficiency Disorders (IDD)
     Study Questions and Practical Work




Introduction
       Malnutrition is a health problem found in all developing countries like India. Undernutrition or lack
of adequate diet is a form of malnutrition which is most widespread. The causes of undernutrition are
many and often interrelated.
       Poverty resulting in low purchasing power is one of the main causes of undernutrition because
poor families cannot buy adequate food for themselves.
       In some communities, especially in rural areas, nutritious food such as milk may not be available
throughout the year. Thus, sometimes even though families can afford to buy nutritious food, non-
availability may lead to malnutrition.
       Ignorance of the relation of foods to health is another reason for the prevalence of malnutrition.
For example, sometimes protein rich foods such as milk, eggs and fish are not fed to the child on the
assumption that they are harmful to the child, even though the, family may be producers of milk or
catching fish themselves.
       Increasing urbanisation is another cause of malnutrition. A number of families flock from villages
to cities, hoping to find better means of livelihood. Often, living conditions for such families are even
worse than what they had in the villages. Overcrowding, insanitary environmental conditions, poor
144                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

hygiene, contaminated water supplies are some of the problems encountered. In addition, not having
enough food; decreases resistance to infections, and exposes the family members to frequent attacks
of diarrhoea and other diseases. This intensifies the problem because what little food is consumed is
not absorbed but lost.
      In poor communities, because both parents have to work to maintain the family, the children,
especially the younger ones, do not have anybody to take care of them and feed them at regular
intervals. Often, an elder child, who may only be a few years older than the infant, is left to take care
of the young ones. Without supervision by adults, the children are not fed properly and may develop
symptoms of one or more deficiency diseases.
      There is thus a vicious circle which encompasses poverty, ignorance, poor housing, disease and
infection and unless this is broken by improving the economic condition of the low socio-economic
groups, malnourishment of a huge sector of the population of the world cannot be eradicated. Figure
13.1 illustrates the close relationship between health, economics and social progress. It shows how
poverty engenders disease which in turn engenders more poverty.
      Foods contain a number of nutrients. When sufficient quantities of the right type of foods are not
eaten, many essential nutrients are not available in adequate quantities to the body. This leads to the
development of several deficiency diseases. Some of the common deficiency diseases found are Protein-
Energy Malnutrition (PEM ), vitamin A deficiency, anaemia due to lack or poor absorption of iron, and
vitamin B complex deficiency.



                                       Poverty

                                       Ignorance

           Absence from work
        (Poor Performance at work)
                                                                      Insufficient     Poor Housing
                                                           Poor
                                                                         Food          and Sanitation
                                                          Nutrition
                    Frequent
                   Infections
                                         Low Vitality

                                        Lack of Energy                                Frequent
                                                                                     Infections



                                       Figure 13.1: Vicious circle.


Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM)
      Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) or Protein Calorie Malnutrition (PCM ) is the name given to
various degrees of nutritional disorders caused by inadequate quantities of protein and energy in the
diet. This is one of the most widespread deficiency disease in India and covers abroad spectrum
ranging from marginal deficiency with loss of weight and poor growth to a severe deficiency in which
the body may have developed oedema or may have wasted away. Such deficiency occurs mainly in
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                               145

children below five years of age, when they are weaned from mother’s milk and the diet substituted
does not supply sufficient protein and energy or protein only. When such lack has been prevalent for a
long time in the community, the parents’ may fail to note the low weight and stunted growth of the
children.




                         Figure 13.2: Kwashiorkor (a) changes in hair, (b) skin.

      One of the names of the disease associated with protein energy malnutrition is ‘Kwashiorkor’, a
term used by Cicely Williams in 1934 to describe this condition while working in West Africa. Kwashiorkor
means “the sickness a child develops when another baby is born”, in the language spoken in Ghana.
Kwashiorkor occurs when there is not enough protein in the diet but calories or energy in the form of
carbohydrates is available in sufficient quantity.
      However, when both protein and energy are insufficient, over prolonged periods, a condition
known as ‘marasmus’ occurs in children.
      In nutritional marasmus, there is also growth failure so that there is stunted growth. In addition,
because of their being not enough protein and calories in the diet, the protein from the body tissues is
used up for energy so that the child is all skin and bone. The child has an alert and hungry expression
by may not necessarily look miserable.
      Kwashiorkor is characterised by growth failure, swelling of legs and feet (oedema), wasted
muscles, a miserable expression and changes in the colour of the skin and hair. The hair changes to a
light colour and becomes so soft that it can be easily pulled out. The skin develops rashes and also
becomes lighter in colour (Figures 13.2 a, b, c, & d).
146                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                          Figure 13.2: (Contd...) Kwashiorkor (c), (d) recovery.

      Both Kwashiorkor and Marasmus can be complicated with other infections due to intestinal
parasites and bacteria.
      The reasons for the prevalence of protein calorie malnutrition are not difficult to find. Poverty as
has already been discussed is the prime factor. The families do not have enough income to purchase the
necessary nutritious foods. Ignorance of the relation of foods to health and nutritional well-being is
another possible cause of protein calorie malnutrition. Apart from this improper distribution of foods
due to controls, lack of proper transport and other such reasons make it difficult for consumers who
can afford to buy, to get the necessary foods.
      In rural communities, especially, the children are nursed by mothers over long periods and
supplementary foods essential to prevent PEM are not provided at the proper age. Sometimes even
when supplementary foods are fed to the infant, they are insufficient and may not contain enough
protein and calories. Bottle feeding has become a part of life in many communities. However, many
mothers do not have any knowledge of the precautions one has to take in using this method of feeding
infants. Bottles and nipples are not washed properly after every feed; sometimes the milk is allowed to
stay in the bottle over long periods allowing growth of pathogenic organisms. These unhygienic feeding
habits are predisposing factors which lead to diarrhoea and other intestinal disorders. In many households,
the wage earner is served the food available in precedence over the needs of infants who may actually
be in greater need of more protein and calories.
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                                 147


Prevention of PEM through Dietary Management
     Eradication of poverty, increase in purchasing power of the population and nutrition education
remain the most effective means of the prevention of PEM. Once there is enough economic freedom,
a number of ways such as those given below can be used to combat the menace of PEM.
     (a) Prolong breast feeding as much as possible but at the right stage start feeding supplementary
          foods.
     (b) Make use of locally available vegetable and animal protein foods for feeding the child.
     (c) Educate the mother and other members of the family about the correct diet for children.

Vitamin A Deficiency
       Besides Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) another principal nutritional problem is vitamin A
deficiency. A direct result of vitamin A deficiency is impairment of vision ultimately leading to blindness.
It is estimated that 9 million are blind and 45 million are visually handicapped in India. Maintenance of
the blind costs the nation Rs. 81 crore and loss of production is estimated around Rs. 1080 crore
(Directorate of Health Services, Government of India). The number of people who have become blind
due to nutritional deficiency of vitamin A runs into several lakhs. This deficiency is seen particularly in
the rice eating southern and eastern belts of India.
       Vitamin A deficiency is found more in children than in adults. Among children, the male child
seems to be more affected than the female child. Pregnant women are also, however, susceptible to
this deficiency. Recent survey of children estimates that 3 to 8 per cent of all pre-school children and
10 to 15 per cent of all school children suffer from vitamin A deficiency. The average percentage of all
children suffering from this deficiency works out to ten. As long as children are breast fed which is
usually from six months to one year, there is no sign of vitamin A deficiency. However, in the lower
socio-economic groups, once the breast milk is withdrawn, the diet does not seem to supply enough of
this vitamin.
       Vitamin A is necessary for growth, and lack of it could result in stunted growth and abnormalities
of bones and teeth. Deficiency of the vitamin also leads to dryness of the conjunctiva of the eye and
cloudiness of the cornea. At this stage night blindness may be observed. Severe deficiency of vitamin
A results in the cornea becoming dry and losing its transparency thus having a hazy appearance.
During the next stage the cornea become soft and may fall off resulting in total blindness (Figures
13.3a and b).
       The principal causes of vitamin A deficiency is lack of adequate supply in the diet. Though
vitamin A is present only in animal foods its precursor beta-carotene is present in green leaves, ripe
mangoes and other fruits. In fact, experiments have shown that an intake for 15 days of green leaves
by pre-school children whose diets were deficient in vitamin A improved their Serum vitamin A level.
Poor absorption of vitamin A and carotene due to lack of fat in the diet, gastro-intestinal disorders, liver
disease and other metabolic abnormalities can also result in vitamin A deficiency.
       Attempts have been made to distribute vitamin A and D in capsule form and skin milk powder
fortified with vitamin A through health centres to children especially in rural areas to prevent vitamin A
deficiency. These have not been very successful because it is not possible to find the same pre-school
child every two or three days to feed these supplements.
       As vitamin A is stored in the liver for prolonged periods, attempts have been made to administer
orally massive doses such as 60,000 mcg of vitamin A to school children half yearly. Experiments
148                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

carried out during the past seven years have shown that 84 per cent of the children were protected
from vitamin A deficiency when such massive doses were given. Oil preparations containing the
vitamin were effective and had very little toxic effects. In view of these findings, the Family Planning
Department of the Government of India has launched a programme in several regions of this country
where there is deficiency of vitamin A to administer massive dosage of vitamin A to pre-school children
at annual intervals.




                                                  (a)




                                                  (b)

                                   Figure 13.3: Vitamin A deficiency.
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                               149


Iron Deficiency Anaemia
      Iron deficiency anaemia is a major nutritional problem in our country. The age groups affected
are women in of reproductive age, pregnant women and pre-school children especially from low
income groups (Figures 13.4 (a) & 13.4 (b)]. Its prevalence ranges from 60 to 70 per cent in women
and children, and 30 to 40 per cent in among adult males and older children in most parts of the
country.
      Deficiency of iron causes anaemia, a condition in which there is a decrease in the haemoglobin
content of the red blood cells (erythrocytes), and there is an alteration in their size and shape. Hence
haemoglobin content of blood has been used to study the incidence of anaemia. Determination of
haemoglobin level in the blood of large numbers of people in different age groups in many parts of the
world, has helped to establish standards with which the results of field studies can be compared.
      Haemoglobin studies of large numbers of school children in India, have shown that more than 50
per cent of them have haemoglobin levels less than 10.8 g per 100 ml. Similarly the haemoglobin levels
of more than 50 per cent pregnant women, attending rural health centres, was found to be less than 10
g per 100 ml.
      The major cause of anaemia in our country is iron deficiency due to inadequate intake of dietary
iron and/or its poor absorption, from the cereal based diets consumed by people. Iron intake in the diets
of low socio-economic groups has been found to be around 20 mg per day in adults and 6 mg per day
for pre-school children. These amounts of iron intake are considered to be marginal due to the high
phytate content of the diets, which render part of the iron unavailable to the body. However, it has been
observed that if sufficient amounts of vitamin C and calcium are provided, iron can be absorbed even
in the presence of phytates.




                                       Figure 13.4: (a) Anaemia
150                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                                          Figure 13.4: (b) Anaemia

      Loss of iron through sweat is possible and in a tropical country like India, it has special relevance.
Loss of blood through hook-worm infestation is another cause of iron deficiency. The infestation
appears to be more in wet areas than dry areas. In such areas anaemia is found to be present in all age
groups and sex groups, including men. Low iron intake coupled with hook-worm infestation thus
poses a serious community health problem. Anaemia could also be due to loss of excessive blood in
menstruation and during child birth in women. Haemorrhages, due to accidental injury or other causes,
could also deplete haemoglobin from the body, which if it is not replaced, could lead to anaemia.
      Anaemia develops slowly and is usually not noticed in early stages. In anaemia, since the
haemoglobin level in the blood is reduced, the supply of oxygen to the cells is reduced. Therefore,
physical activity is considerably lowered, which results in reduction in working capacity of the person.
If we consider the high prevalence of iron deficiency anaemia, we may realise the magnitude of economic
loss in the India, due to reduced work capacity of a large percentage of the population.
      The incidence of anaemia can be reduced by improvements of dietary habits. These are inclusion
of leafy vegetables, which provide iron; vitamin C and calcium, and pulses, which provide protein, iron
and B vitamins. Since change in dietary habits is a slow process, some interim public health measures
have been taken to reduce the incidence of anaemia. These include distribution of tablets containing
iron and folic acid to pregnant women at primary health centres and iron supplements to school children.
      In addition to these programmes, the control of parasites associated with blood loss (like hook-
worm) need to be given top priority to reduce the incidence of anaemia. It would also be necessary to
improve environmental sanitation to eradicate infection with parasites.
      Another practical method to combat and prevent iron deficiency anaemia is to increase iron intake
in the diet through fortification of a universally consumed dietary article with iron. In the Indian
context, salt has been indentified as a suitable vehicle for fortification, as it is consumed by all in a fairly
uniform amount. The iron fortified salt has been found acceptable in trial experiments. It has been
tested among anaemic children and rural and urban communities. It was observed that the prevalence
of anaemia was reduced significantly, when iron fortified salt was consumed over a period of 12 to 18
months. The fortified salt is now being introduced in two districts of one state through public distribution
system. The results obtained in this trial will guide the ultimate introduction of iron fortified salt in the
country.
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                              151

     Thus a mufti-faceted approach is being used to control and prevent the incidence of iron deficiency
anaemia.

Vitamin B-complex Deficiency
      The overall prevalence rate of vitamin B-complex deficiency is estimated to be about 20 per cent
in India (Figures. 13.5a, b and c).




                               (a)                                        (b)




                                     Figure 13.5: B-complex deficiency.
152                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Some of the common symptoms of vitamin B-complex deficiency are sore mouth, sore tongue
and erosion at the angles of the mouth. These symptoms are widespread in the community, more so
among the ill fed children of the low socio-economic groups.
      Low intake of these vitamins in the diet is the primary cause of deficiency. This is compounded
by gastro-intestinal infections, such as diarrhoea and dysentery, in which even the little vitamins ingested,
may be flushed out before absorption. During pregnancy and lactation, the need for the B vitamins is
increased, if there is no extra intake of the vitamins in the diet, deficiency symptoms may occur. It is
observed that chronic alcoholics suffer from thiamin deficiency, as the need for thiamin increases with
ingestion of alcohol.
      Food processing methods affect the vitamin content of the products. For example, thiamin and
niacin are partially lost in refining and polishing of cereals, such as rice and wheat. Parboiling helps to
conserve these vitamins and in regions of the country like Kerala, where parboiled rice is consumed,
incidence of thiamin deficiency, is rare. However, marginal deficiency could still exist in homes in rice-
eating areas, if practices such as excessive washing of rice before preparation and discarding the water
in which rice is cooked are still prevalent.
      Beri-beri, a disease caused by thiamin deficiency, used to be endemic in the coastal parts of
Andhra, especially where the rice polished in mills was used. But recent surveys show that there is not
much evidence of the disease. The enactment of laws making under-milling compulsory and improvement
in the technology of milling may be one of the reasons for reduction of this deficiency. Another reason
possibly is the change in dietary habits of the people, such as inclusion of foods such as wheat and
wheat products, which contain thiamin, in the diet.
      Beri-beri, which is caused by deficiency of thiamin, can affect children as well as adults. The
most serious victim is the baby of a mother, who does not secrete enough milk and has little thiamin in
her milk. In such thiamin deficient infants, one of the symptoms is the visible cry in which the child
appears to be crying, without making any noise. The disease occurs between the first and fifth month
and it strikes suddenly and could result in death, if no adult is looking after the child, when the mother
is away at work. Little siblings, who may be in-charge, may not realise that the infant is crying and is
in need of nourishment.
      In adults, thiamin deficiency could result either in dry beri-beri or wet beri-beri. Dry beri-beri is
characterised by arms and legs wasting away, losing their sensation. Wet beri-beri is accompanied by
swelling of the limbs and impaired function of the heart; it could ultimately result in death due to cardiac
failure.
      Riboflavin deficiency is frequently observed in children and some adults among the low income
groups in India. The symptoms of this deficiency are cracks in the skin and corners of the mouth,
known as cheilosis. These cracks have a raw appearance and are slow to heal. The eyes turn red blood
shot due to the cornea becoming crowded with capillaries. There is a tendency to avoid bright light.
This is known as photophobia.
      The deficiency of niacin occurs, when the staple cereals are highly refined and intake of dals and
legumes is meagre. Niacin deficiency is called pellagra (rough skin) and it affects the skin, the gastro-
intestinal tract and the nervous system. There are rashes on the skin (dermatitis), which at times can
affect the whole body (Figure 13.6). Diarrhoea is another symptom, which is frequently observed.
The effect on the nervous system results in lack of alertness, anxiety and irritability. This could slowly
develop into a situation in which the person affected may become mentally confused and could even
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                               153

lead to insanity. These severe effects on the nervous system are termed dementia. If the deficiency is
not corrected in time, it could result in death.
      Sporadic incidence of pellagra, a disease occurring due to severe deficiency of niacin, is reported
from regions, where jowar (sorghum vulgare) is the staple. Jowar is not low in niacin and tryptophan,
the amino acid from which it can be synthesised in the body. The studies carried out at the National
Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, seem to indicate that amino acid imbalance (high leucine/low iso-
leucine) may be the cause of pellagra prevalent in the regions, where jowar is the staple food. This is
more so during lean periods when jowar may be the only source of nourishment and other foods to
supplement the staple are not available. New strains of jowar with lower concentrations of leucine
have been developed to prevent the sporadic occurrence of pellagra.




                                         Figure 13.6: Pellagra
154                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Thus thiamin deficiency could be corrected by taking care to see that the rice is either undermilled
or parboiled. Inclusion of other foods rich in thiamin such as wheat and wheat products, could help
remove thiamin deficiency. Use of milk and milk products and other foods, which are rich sources of
riboflavin, could prevent riboflavin deficiency. Groundnuts are a rich source of niacin and very much
liked by most people. Use of a combination of cereals, pulses and inclusion of groundnuts, would help
prevent B-complex deficiency.

Iodine Deficiency Disorders (IDD)
      Iodine deficiency in man leads to a number of disorders, which include goitre, cretinism, mental
retardation, deaf-mutism, neuropsychic retardation and myxoedema in elderly. From the socio-economic
point of view, endemic neuropsychic retardation may be the most important of the iodine deficiency
disorders. One is often struck by the number of superficially normal-looking persons in the endemic
regions, who on closer observation are found to be mentally subnormal or have mild defects in their
motor function or have both these lacks simultaneously. It has been observed that large numbers of
cases of mild or moderate retardation in intellectual, motivational or neuromotor maturation occur in
conjunction with endemic goitre. In order to focus attention on this multifaceted nature of iodine
deficiency, these disorders are now referred to as iodine deficiency disorders and not goitre.




                                             Fig. 13.7 Goitre
Disorders of Nutrition                                                                                  155

      According to official estimates, 145 million people in India live in the goitre-endemic regions, and
40 million are actually suffering from goitre. Apart from the sub-Himalayan states, which were always
known to be goitre-prone, recent surveys have shown the presence of endemic pockets in Andhra
Pradesh, Madhya Pradesh, Maharastra, Bihar, Gujarat end Kerala as well. In all endemic goitre pockets
have been observed in 17 states to varying extent.
      In the endemic areas of goitre, a number of disorders are observed in children. There is retardation
of physical growth, as also lack of mental development. A number of deaf-mutes have also been
observed in these area. The ultimate sequel is occurrence of cretinism in children born to women, who
were so severely depleted that they could not provide iodine for proper development of the foetus.
Cretins are dwarfs. Cretins have low basal metabolism, and suffer from muscular weakness, dry skin,
mental retardation and their skeletal development is arrested. If desiccated thyroid is given to such
infant, early enough, there is noticeable improvement in physical development, mental retardation may
be less severe, but any damage, which may have taken place in the central nervous system, cannot be
reversed.
      Goitre results in enlargement of the thyroid gland, as is seen in Figure 13.7. Girls and women are
more susceptible to goitre than boys and men.
      The simplest way of eradicating iodine deficiency is by addition of iodine to the diet. Salt is a very
convenient vehicle for addition of iodine. This procedure is inexpensive and within the technological
capability of our country. It has been used since the 1950s. The efficacy of use of iodised salt to reduce
the prevalence of IDD has been demonstrated under Indian conditions. However, there have been some
difficulties in the distribution of iodised salt and the progress in eradication of this deficiency has been
slow.
      In view of the high incidence of the deficiency and its deleterious effects on the health of future
generation, there has been a new momentum in the implementation of iodine prophylactic programmes
in the developing world. In India, the government has decided to extend the salt iodation programme to
cover the entire country by 1993 in a phased manner.
      In view of the high incidence of anaemia in the country, now attempts are being made to fortify
salt with both iron and iodine. The technological aspect of this process have been successfully completed.
The doubly fortified salt is going to be field tested in Uttar Pradesh and A ndhra Pradesh. When these
studies are successfully completed; we can hope to eradicate two debilitating deficiency diseases—
IDD and anaemia, by use of fortified salt. It will be our duty to educate the public about the importance
of using the fortified salt.

Study Questions
       1. Discuss the reasons of malnutrition among Indians.
       2. What is PEM? Can it be prevented in the home?
       3. Write short notes on:
          (a) Vitamin A deficiency
          (b) Iron deficiency anaemia
          (c) Causes of anaemia
          (d) Vitamin B-complex deficiency
          (e) Iodine deficiency disorders
156                                                 Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

           (f) Cretinism
           (g) Fortification of foods.

Practical Work
      (a) Plan and prepare nutritionally adequate meals for under-nourished toddlers and pre-school
          children by use of multi-mixes (at least five simple preparations) steamed, soft-cooked and
          boiled foods.
      (b) Plan supplementary foods for pre-schoolers, school children and pregnant mothers at low
          cost.
        PART - III
Meal Planning and Management
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                                                                                 CHAPTER 14


     Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate
                                                Diet


     Introduction
     Development of a Food Guide
     Food Guide for Selecting an Adequate Diet
     Group 1: Cereals and Breads
     Group 2: Protein Foods
     Group 3: Protective Vegetables and Fruits
     Group 4: Other Vegetables and Fruits
     Group 5: Oils, Fats and Sugars
     Nutrient Density
     Practical Aspects of Food Selection
     Use of the Food Guide in Meal Planning and Evaluation
     Plans for Food Budget
     Nutrition Education
     Fallacies about Foods and Nutrition
     Some Misconceptions Related to Carbohydrates in the Diet
     General Fallacies
     “Natural Foods”, “Health Foods” and “Organic Foods”
     Study Questions



Introduction
      A diet, which provides all the essential nutrients in sufficient quantities to meet your needs, is an
adequate or balanced diet. You need a plan to select an adequate diet so simple and attractive that
everyone including you, a young student as also the elderly family members can understand and follow
it. The experts have devised such a plan. This practical plan, known as a food guide, helps to ensure
good nutrition through proper food selection.
160                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Development of a Food Guide
      Several factors have to be considered in developing a food guide for a large country like India.
Some of the relevant factors are:
        • Foods plentifully available and normally used in the dietary.
        • Normal meal pattern.
        • Recommended dietary intakes of nutrients for Indians.
        • Need to emphasise some foods because of prevailing nutritional deficiencies in the country.
      As you know, food availability and meal patterns vary from one country to another. Therefore, a
food guide for one country, such as the Basic Four used in the USA, is not suitable for use in India,
where meal pattern, food availability and cost are different. This is one of the reasons for developing a
food guide for India.
      In developing a food guide, the foods are classified on the basis of their use and the major
nutrients which they provide. Such a classification can serve as a guide for the selection and use of
foods. For example, cereals, dals, and leafy and other vegetables are such classes. Most preparations
use oils and fats as a seasoning, and jaggery or sugar as a sweetener. These foods, which enhance food
acceptability, can be one of the food groups. This is how the food guide is developed.
      The five food groups suggested by ICMR and their nutritional contribution is presented in Table
14.1.
                       Table 14.1: Nutrient Contribution of the Five Groups

   Food Group                  Foods Included                                 Main Nutrients

         1.         Cereals and their products –                   Energy, protein, iron, thiamin, niacin,
                    Rice, wheat, jowar, bajra, ragi, maize,        fibre
                    other millets and their products
         2.         Protein foods –                                Proteins, energy, calcium, iron, B-
                    Dals, legumes, milk, eggs, fish, poultry,      complex vitamins, invisible fat, fibre
                    meat and their products
         3.         Protective vegetables and fruits –             Carotenoids, vitamin C, iron,
                    (a) All green leafy vegetables, orange-        calcium, folic acid, fibre
                    yellow fruits and vegetables
                    (b) Vit. C-rich fruits and vegetables          Vitamin C, carotene, fibre

         4.         Other vegetables and fruits –                  Supplementary sources of minerals,
                    All gourds, beans, peas, potatoes,             vitamins and fibre
                    onions, etc., all other fruits — banana,
                    apple, melons, grapes, etc.

         5.         Oils, fats, sugars and their products –        Energy, fat, essential fatty acids
                    Oils, ghee, butter, vanaspati, sugar,          Energy
                    jaggery, jams, syrups

Adapted from ICMR Special Report Series 1991.
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                            161


Food Guide for Selecting an Adequate Diet
       All the foods we use in our daily meals are divided into five groups in the food guide for India.
This is presented in Table 14.1. The food groups are chosen because of the specific nutrients contributed
by each to the total diet. Foods have been assigned to the groups on the basis of their composition. The
food guide is designed to direct selection of foods and quantities consumed to provide by RDA, thus
forming the foundation of our adequate diet.
       As you may observe, the first column in the table indicates the food group, the third column
specifies the amount in one serving, and the last column indicates the minimum number of servings to
be taken to meet your nutritional needs. If sufficient amounts of foods from each of the five groups are
included in the day’s diet, the nutrient requirements of the body will be met. Such a diet is a balanced
diet, as it meets the person’s nutritional needs.
       Let us study each food group in details, so that we can use the food guide as a practical tool. The
food guide is presented pictorially in Figure 14.2.
                              Table 14.2: Food Guide for India      (1) (2) (3)



 Food Group              Foods Included                          Size of Serving         Suggested
                                                                                       No. of Servings
     1.         Cereals and Breads                                      25 g                9–16
                The staples, rice, wheat, bajra, jowar, maize,
                ragi and their preparations
     2.         Protein Foods
                Dals, legumes, nuts and oilseeds                       25 g
                Milk and milk products                                 150 g                 3–5
                Eggs                                                   1 No.
                Fish, poultry, meat                                    30 g
     3.         (a) Protective Vegetables and Fruits                  50–75 g                1–2
                All green leafy vegetables, orange, yellow
                vegetables and fruits
                (b) Vit. C Rich Vegetables and                        50–75 g                1–2
                Fruits: Amla4, guava, drumstick, orange,
                papaya, mausambi, etc.
     4.         Other Vegetables and Fruits                           50–75 g             3 or more
                All the remaining vegetables such as fruit
                vegetables, gourds, immature beans and peas,
                potatoes, onions, etc. Fruits such as bananas,
                melons, sapota, grapes, apples, etc.
     5.         Oils, Fats, Sugars
                Oils, ghee, butter, vanaspati                            5g               5 or more
                Sugar, jaggery, murabbas, syrups                         5g               5 or more

1. Adapted from ICMR Special Report Series 1991.
2. Mudambi, Sumati R., Food for Fitness, Nutrition Education 2, SNDT Univ. Publication, 1971.
3. Mudambi, Sumati R. & M.V. Rajagopal, Fundamentals of Foods & Nutrition, New Age International (P)
   Limited, New Delhi 1990, pp. 24–5.
4. Only 10 g will suffice.
162                                                          Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Group 1: Cereals and Breads
       The first food group includes preparations of cereals and millets, which are the staple foods in
India. These foods provide more than half our body’s daily need for energy and proteins. In addition,
if the whole grain or its flour is used in the preparation, these foods can be a valuable source of thiamin
(one of the B vitamins) and iron.
       The foods in the group include rice, wheat, jowar, bajra, makka (maize or corn), ragi or nachani,
and cereal products such as rawa (suji or semolina), rice flakes (pohe, aval), senvaya (vermicelli), etc.
(Figure 14.2).
                                       1. Cereals and Breads




                                       2. Body-Protein Foods




                                              3-5 serving–Children
                                         5 or more serving–Teenagers
                                           4 or more serving–Adults


                      3a. Green and Orange-Yellow                      3b. Vit. C-rich Fruits and
                            Vegetables Fruits                                  Vegetables




                                          1 or more              1 or more



                                       4. Other Vegetables and Fruits




                                              5. Oils and Sugars




                                                 25 gm or more of each


                                     Figure 14.1: A daily food guide.
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                           163

      Serving Size: One serving of these foods is any preparation made from 25g of any cereal of
millet. This is equal to half a katori of cooked rice, one medium chapati, two phulkas, two or three
puries, half a medium roti or bhakari, two slices of bread, two tablespoons of rice flakes (dry, not
soaked), or two tablespoons of ready-to-cereal.
      Suggested number of servings: A sedentary person may need about ten servings. Those who
need more servings of foods in this group are:
        • Teenagers.
        • Expectant mothers (latter half of pregnancy) and nursing mothers.
        • Persons involved in heavy physical work such as lifting and carrying heavy loads, agricultural
           work, pulling rikshaw, etc.
        • Players who practice for hours games such as badminton, tennis, squash, hututu, khokho,
           etc.
        • Persons whose hobbies involve intense physical exertion for some hours each day.




                           Figure 14.2: Group 1 — Cereals & their products.

      Expectant mothers, in the latter half of pregnancy, need two servings more than their normal
intake, while nursing mothers may need four servings more than their normal intake.

Group 2: Protein Foods
      This group includes the major sources of proteins in our dietary, such as dals, whole pulses, milk,
eggs, fish, poultry and meat (Figures 14.3 & 14.4). A third or more of our protein requirement is met
by these foods. These foods are not only good sources of proteins, but also of minerals and vitamins.
Dals, eggs, and meat are good sources of iron. In addition, milk is a very good source of calcium and
riboflavin. Milk, eggs and liver are rich in vitamin A. These foods also supply part of our requirement
of the B vitamins. The foods in this group are varied in their composition. Therefore, the serving size
of these foods varies as given below:
              Dals and whole legumes or pulses               25 g
              Milk and milk preparations                     1 medium cup or 150 ml
              Egg (medium size 50–52g)                       1 No.
              Fish, meat and poultry                         25 to 30 g
164                                              Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                           Figure 14.3: Group 2—Plant protein foods.




                          Figure 14.4: Group 2—Animal protein foods.

    One serving of each of these foods provides about 5 to 6 programmes of protein.
    Suggested number of servings: The number varies with the person’s age and body size. For
example, an adult woman may need 3 servings, whereas a teenager may need 5 servings.
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                             165


Group 3: Protective Vegetables and Fruits
      The protective vegetables and fruits are rich sources of beta-carotene or provitamin A and ascorbic
acid or vitamin C. To emphasise these sources, the group is divided into group 3(a) and group 3(b).
Group 3(a) — Vitamin A Rich Green and Yellow Vegetables and Fruits
       This group is a rich source of pro-vitamin A, and includes all dark green leafy vegetables such as
math (amaranth), palak (spinach), methi (fenugreek), radish leaves, colocasia leaves, etc. It also includes
light green leafy vegetables such as cabbage, onion tops, and lettuce, and yellow-orange vegetables and
fruits such as carrots, pumpkin, mangoes, papaya, oranges, cantaloupe (turbuz), apricots, etc.
(Figure 14.5).
       All of these vegetables and fruits share one common component, which brings them together in
one group. This component is the yellow plant pigment beta-carotene, which is a precursor of vitamin
A. One serving of this group provides 75–120 per cent of our day’s need of vitamin A. In addition, the
dark green leafy vegetables provide about 50 per cent need for vitamin C.
       Serving size: One serving is 50 g of the vegetables or fruit, or half a katori of cut vegetables or
fruit.
       Suggested number of servings: It is suggested that one or more servings a day be included
from this group. In practice, you can include dark green leafy vegetables three times a week, yellow —
orange vegetables two times a week, and light green vegetables two times a week.




                       Figure 14.5: Group 3(a) & (b) Protective vegetables & fruits.
166                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Group 3(b) — Vitamin C Rich Vegetables and Fruits
       In this group we have rich sources of ascorbic acid, which is also known as vitamin C. A tropical
country such as India has a number of rich sources of vitamin C, which are not found in temperate
regions, and hence are not mentioned in the Western food guides. For example, the richest source of
vitamin C in the tropics is amla (Indian gooseberry), which contains ten times as much vitamin C as
any citrus fruit. Guavas, cashew apples, bor, cabbage, and drumsticks (both leaves and pods) are
excellent sources of vitamin C, and contain 3 to 6 times the amount provided by citrus fruits.
       Besides these, we have a variety of citrus fruits such as oranges, mausambis, pummelo, grapefruits,
etc., and other fruits such as papaya, mangoes, pineapples and tomatoes, which are also good sources
of vitamin C (Figure 14.5).
       Serving size: Generally, one serving is a 50 g portion or half a katori of cut vegetable or fruit.
There are some exceptions to this serving size, when we choose a very concentrated source. For
example, you need only one amla, or 25 g of guava or cashew apple to comprise a serving.
       Suggested number of servings: One or more servings a day is suggested. One serving provides
half or more of our day’s need for vitamin C. Please remember that some vegetables and fruits are good
sources of both beta-carotene and vitamin C. Some examples of these are cabbage, drumstick leaves,
amaranth, oranges, mangoes and papaya. If you choose one of these, you will take care of the servings
from both group 3(a) and group 3(b).

Group 4: Other Vegetables and Fruits
     All the vegetables and fruits not mentioned as part of Group 3(a and b) are included in this group.
The members of this group are:
     Fruit and flower vegetables — cucumber, cauliflower, brinjal, capsicum, ladies finger, etc.
     Gourds — ash gourd, bottle-, snake-, bitter-, ridge-, sponge gourd and others. Immature beans
and peas — french beans, cluster beans, chawli, red gram (tender), walpapdi, etc.
     Roots and tubers — beetroot, radish, potatoes, yams, onion, etc.
     Other Fruits — bananas, melons, grapes, apples, jackfruit, plums, berries, chikus (sapota),
pears, plantain, litchis, seetaphal, ramphal, pomegranate, etc. Some of these are depicted in Figure
14.6




                            Figure 14.6: Group 4—Other vegetables & fruits.
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                            167

     These vegetables and fruits supplement the minerals, vitamins, and fibre provided by Group 3 in
oru dietary.
     Serving size: One serving is a 50 g or half a katori of cut vegetable or fruit.
     Suggested number of servings: It is suggested that you include at least three or more servings
from this group each day.

Group 5: Oils, Fats and Sugars
      There are two major classes of foods included in this group: oils and fats including oils, ghee,
butter and vanaspati, used as a spread, seasoning or shortening and sugars. Sugar, jaggery and
preparations such as jams, syrups, etc., are included as sugar serving (Figure 14.7).




                               Figure 14.7: Group 5: Sugars, oils and fats

      These foods enhance the taste and acceptability of any preparation. All these foods provide
energy. Sugars are a readily available energy source, while oils and fats are a concentrated energy
source.
      In contrast to sugars, which are not a good source of any essential nutrients, oils and fats have
other functions besides providing energy. Oils and fats are necessary to transport and utilise fat-soluble
vitamins in the body. Vegetable oils contain essential fatty acids, which are necessary for growth in the
young and to maintain the health of our skin.
      Serving size: A typical serving size for oils, fats and sugars is 5 g, or about a teaspoon, since we
use a teaspoon to add sugar to beverages and also to serve oil or ghee.
      Suggested number of servings: Since it is not an essential component in nutritional planning,
there is no recommended amount for sugar.
168                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Generally, four to five servings a day of fats and oils is suggested. We must include about 10 g or
two servings of vegetable oil to meet our need for essential fatty acids. The remaining servings needed
can be taken as ghee, butter, or vanaspati.
      The total amount of oils and fats in the diet will vary with our total energy needs and our energy
intake from the other food groups. We must remember that high fat diets are harmful to our health.
Therefore, the ICMR Advisory Committee (RDI, 1991) suggested that the intake of dietary fat be 20
per cent or less of the total calorie intake for adults and 25 per cent for young children.
      In summary, how much do we need of these foods? The answer is simple: only as much as is
required to meet our nutrient and energy needs and to make the food palatable.

Nutrient Density
      Several investigators are individually studying ways to develop an easy-to-use index of nutritive
quality of individual foods. One of these is nutrient density. It is the ratio of the percentage of the
recommended allowance of the nutrient to the percentage of the energy requirement in a serving of the
food. For example, a serving of cow’s milk (150 ml) provides 100 kcal, 180 mg calcium and 2.9 mg
of riboflavin. The nutrient density is calculated as given in Table 14.2.
                              Table 14.2: Nutrient Density Calculation

                                            Energy               Calcium             Riboflavin
                                             Kcal                  mg                   mg

       RDA (Man)                             2400                   400                 1.40
       Milk — 1 serving                       100                   180                 0.30
       Percentage of RDA from milk             5                    45                   21

       Nutrient Density                                             9.0                  4.2

      Thus milk is an excellent source of calcium, as it provides 45 per cent of the RDA in one serving
and of riboflavin (21 per cent of RDA); while it accounts for only 5 per cent of RDA for energy. Thus
the nutrient density of calcium in milk is 9.0 and riboflavin 4.2.

Practical Aspects of Food Selection
      While you select foods from each food group, pay attention to the practical aspects of so that you
get the most nutrients for each rupee spent for food.
      In Group 1, the cereals and breads group, the amount of iron and thiamin in the food preparations
varies with how refined the grain or flour is. The chapatis made from whole wheat flour contain six
times as much thiamin as bread made from the same amount of refined wheat flour. Parboiled rice and
rice flakes contains more iron and thiamin than milled polished rice. This knowledge can help your
selection of foods from this group.
      In the protein foods group, there is a wide choice of foods. Group 2 includes all types of dals
such as tur, chana, mung, urad, masur and whole pulses or legumes such as chawli, rajma, wal, matki,
chana, etc. As you may know, oilseeds such as groundnuts and til (sesame) also belong to the legume
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                               169

family and are included in this group. You can choose those dals and pulses, which are available at the
most reasonable cost. Though all dals and legumes are good sources of B-vitamins, mung contains
more thiamin than others. Groundnuts are a very rich source of niacin.
       Milk is another important part of Group 2. Milk is used in a number of preparations, such as tea,
coffee, butter-milk, curds, basundi, etc. To know the total servings taken, we need to estimate the
amount of milk used in these preparations. We may use 15 to 25 g per cup of tea, and 30 g in coffee.
A cup of butter-milk may contain 40 to 50 g of milk, while a cup of basundi may be made from 2.5 to
3 cups of milk. So you must note the amounts used in order to estimate your total milk intake.
       Similarly, when you use eggs in a custard or pudding, you will have to note the recipe and portion
eaten to estimate the protein intake. When you buy meat, poultry and fish, note the fatty tissue and
bone, and estimate the lean part per kilogramme. If you use these in a curry, record the total volume
and the amount served per person to estimate the protein intake.
       In Group 3 and Group 4, the cost per serving depends to a great deal on the particular vegetables
and fruits selected. The edible portion of vegetables and fruits varies immensely. Estimating the edible
portion is important, since this affects the cost per serving.
       In Group 3(a), leafy vegetables are sold as a bunch. The entire bunch is not edible; as tough stems
and damaged leaves are removed. The amount removed varies with the quality and the variety of the
leafy vegetable. A good quality spinach has 90 per cent edible portion while fenugreek (methi) may
have only 50 per cent.
       The edible portion of vegetables and fruits from Group 3(a) and Group 4 also varies greatly.
Amla, tomato, capsicum, french beans, cluster beans, beetroot, radish, etc., have a 90 to 98 per cent
edible portion, while peas, oranges, papaya, mango, and banana have only a 50 to 75 per cent edible
portion.
       Food cost: One of the questions that worries us is: will nutritious food be more costly than our
present dietary? The answer to this question is an emphatic NO. We can afford nutritious food.
       Vegetables and fruits are the foods, which have the greatest variation in price. Those, which are
in season, cost the least. The price of a particular variety is lowest at the peak of its season. What is less
well known is that at the peak of the season, each vegetable and fruit has the highest nutrient
content, flavour and taste.
       There has been extensive research in this aspect and it has been proved that the nutrient content
and yield of any plant food, whether it is spinach, beans, oranges or mangoes, is highest at the peak
of the season. When you buy seasonal foods, you buy the best in terms of quality and nutrients at a
reasonable price.
       Another point to note is that inexpensive varieties are often more nutritious. Inexpensive fruits
such as amla and guava are excellent sources of vitamin C, while costly fruits such as apples and
grapes are poor source of this vitamin.
       Many vegetables and fruits can be grown at home in each season. The home produce can be a
valuable source of nutrition and improved quality of the diet.
       Moderation is a good rule as far as the foods in Group 5 are concerned. As sugar is only a
sweetening agent, we would be well advised to consume it in reasonable amounts. If we take too much
of it, we will not have place for foods that supply varied nutrients. And although oils and fats play an
important role in the dietary, high fat diets are recognised to be harmful to our health.
170                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Use of the Food Guide in Meal Planning and Evaluation
      The food guide is a practical tool to use in meal planning and evaluation. Please note the following
important points when using the food guide in meal planning:
       1. Select foods from each of the five broad food groups.
       2. Choose at least the minimum number of servings from each of the food groups.
       3. Make choices within each group. Please remember that foods in each group are similar but
           not identical in food values.
       4. Try to include at least one food from Group 2 in each meal.
       5. Use seasonal vegetables and fruits to ensure good nutrition at low cost.
      The nutritive value of menus planned, using the food guide, for an adult woman and an adult man
are given in Tables 14.3 and 14.4. On scrutiny of these tables, it is evident that the nutrient content of
the menu is equal to or greater than the recommended dietary allowances (RDA) for an adult woman
and man.
                     Table 14.3: Nutrient Content of Menu for an Adult Woman

Food      Foods and                 Amount            Energy         Protein        Vit. A         Iron
Group     Servings                    g                Kcal             g         value mcg         mg
   1.     Rice            (4)         100                340             7                           3.0
          Chapati         (5)         125                425            15                          14.4
          Bread           (2)          40                 98             3                           0.2
   2.     Dal             (2)          50                170            11                           2.9
          Milk            (1)         150                100             5            240            0.3
          Egg             (1)          50                 86             7            300            1.0
   3.     (a) Amaranth (1)              50                22             2           2760           13.0
          (b) Guava    (1)              50                24             –                           1.0
   4.     Brinjal      (1)              50                15             1                           0.4
          French beans (1               50                12             1             65            0.9
          Potato       (1)              75                73             1                           0.5
   5.     Jaggery                       15                57             –              –            1.7
          Sugar                         25               100             –              –              –
          Oil                           20               180             –              –              –
          Vanaspati                     15               135             –            112              –
          Ghee/Butter                   10                90             –             73
          Total intake                                  1927            53          3,550           39.3
          RDI                                           1900            45          3,000           32.0
          Excess or deficit                              +27            +8          +550            +7.3

     You can meet the dietary needs of different members of your family by using the food guide. For
example, teenagers can take more servings from Group 1, 2 and 5 to meet the high energy requirements
of body building and growth.
     Besides using the food guide to plan meals, you can use it to evaluate your present dietary and to
modify it, if necessary. It can also be used to check the diet plans of institutions for nutritional adequacy.
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                             171

       The dietary score card is presented in Table 14.5. Five points are awarded for a serving in Groups
1, 2, 4 and 5, with ten points given for a serving in Group 3. The maximum scores for each food group
are also given.
       This dietary score card can be used to evaluate any menu or diet plan by following the following
steps:
                           Table 14.4: Nutrient Content of Menu for An Adult Man

Food         Foods and                  Amount        Energy        Protein      Vit. A        Iron
Group        Servings                     g            Kcal            g          mcg           mg
   1.        Rice             (4)         100           340            7                         3.0
             Chapatis         (6)         150           510           18                        17.2
             Bread            (2)       4 slices        196            6                         0.4
   2.        Dal              (2)          50           170           11                         2.9
             Milk             (2)         300           200           10          480            0.6
             Eggs             (2)         100           170           13          600            2.1
   3.        (a) Palak        (1)          50            13              1      2,790            5.5
             (b) Orange       (1)          50            24              –     0 –550            0.1
   4.        Brinjal          (1)          50            12              1                       0.4
             Cauliflower      (1)          50            15              1                       0.7
             Potato           (1)          75            75              1                       0.5
  5.         Jaggery                     20 g            76              –                       2.2
             Sugar                       20 g           205              –          –              –
             Oil                         25 g           225              –          –              –
             Vanaspati Ghee/Butter       20 g           180              –        150              –
             Total intake                              2,406          69        4,570           35.6
             RDI                                       2,400          55        3,000           24.0
             Excess or Deficit                            +6         +14       +1,570          +11.6


                                        Table 14.5: Dietary Score Card

                Food Group                            Points Per Serving        Maximum Score
        1.      Breads and Cereals                             5                          45
        2.      Protein Foods                                  5                          15
        3.      Protective Vegetables and Fruits               10                         20
        4.      Other Vegetables and Fruits                    5                          10

        5.      Fats, Oils and Sugars                          5                          10
172                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       1. Check if all five groups are included in the meals.
       2. Add up the score for each group.
       3. If the total score for any group is higher than the maximum permissible score, count only
           the maximum score for that group.
       4. Add the total score and evaluate as follows:
                         100 Excellent
                         90 Good
           Less than     90 Need to include the missing groups.
     You can add more foods from all groups to the minimum servings suggested, in order to make the
meals satisfying. One word of caution. Be moderate in the amount of food you take from each group,
even if you like a particular food very much. Otherwise, you may not be able to include sufficient
amounts of foods from all the food groups.
     Also, snacks are an important part of meal planning. The term snack is applied to a wide variety
of foods, which are eaten between meals. A number of snacks are offered and eaten at tea, social
meetings or get–togethers. The choice of these foods can be important in meeting one’s nutritional
needs.

Plans for Food Budget
      In practice, one must make daily menus for a week and base the food purchase. This step is
essential whether the plan is for a single person, a family or an institution. The food purchase is guided
by nutrient needs and also the food budget. Planning helps to make the best use of the available money
to meet the needs of the family members.
      The food choices within a group can be guided by one’s food budget. The steps, which help to
get the best returns for the food money include:
         • Buying the staple foods, dals and pulses in bulk, when the prices are competitive, just after
           the harvest.
         • Buying milk and milk products from government dairy outlets.
         • Buying fruits and vegetables from main markets at competitive rates.
         • Buying seasonal vegetables and fruits.
         • Buy sugar, jaggery in bulk from wholesale dealers.
         • Buy oil from wholesale depots in bulk.
         • Make butter and ghee at home.
         • Buy spices in bulk and prepare the spice mix at home.
      There are several government programmes, which subsidise foods for the various socio-economic
stratas. These include rationed foodgrains, foods given to children in grade schools to ensure attendance,
school lunch programmes and supplementary feeding of expectant and nursing mothers. These
programmes help to meet the nutritional needs. To some extent these reduce the food budget of the
family.

Nutrition Education
      Nutrition education is a very important input to help people to select an adequate diet. Children
learn food selection and how to select an adequate diet from their parents. It is good to remember that
Food Guides for Selecting an Adequate Diet                                                               173

there is a lot of good in the practices of present-day regional groups that have enjoyed good health and
longevity.
      In nutrition education, people must be encouraged to retain the existing beneficial food habits and
add other foods which may help to meet their nutritional needs. Successful nutrition education reinforces
the existing cultural pattern and brings about only qualitative improvement by using available food
resources.
      At present nutrition is taught in limited number of faculties. It should form a part of primary
school curricula. The need to prepare authentic, accurate teaching material for use in teaching at all
levels can never be overemphasised. It is the responsibility of each person, who learns this subject, to
contribute to this effort.

Fallacies about Foods and Nutrition
      A fallacy is a false or wrong idea. Wrong ideas about effect of food on health may be spread
deliberately by those, who wish to promote their products. Food fallacies exist because of ignorance of
basic scientific information about the subject. Food quacks exploit this ignorance to sell their products.
      In each region, people have a number of beliefs. These are passed on unquestioned from one
generation to the next. It may be wise to consider those in the light of scientific knowledge. Some may
have a sound basis, others not.

Some Misconceptions about Carbohydrate in the Diet
      Potatoes are fattening. No particular food is fattening or otherwise. All energy intake in excess
of the body’s need is stored as fat. Potatoes provide about a kilocalorie per gram, about the same as
cooked rice. It is the oil, used in seasoning or frying that contributes to the extra calories of the potato
recipes.
      Honey is said to contribute significant amounts of minerals and vitamins. This is not supported by
facts.
      Similarly, it is said that jaggery contributes more nutrients to the diet than white sugar. Actually it
does not, for the amount consumed in the diet is very small.
      Sucrose (sugar) is injurious to health, because it is pure refined food. This not true. It is the
cheapest sweetener available and hence used in infant milk formulas and in medical preparations. When
used in moderation, it is an important source of quick energy. Used in ORS, it is life saving. It is present
in many foods in nature such as apples, peas, honey, oranges, etc.
      Maida is nutritionally poorer than atta (whole wheat flour). This is true.
       When grains are milled and refined, the outer coat of the grain is removed. Thus the high quality
protein, minerals, B vitamins, all the vitamin E found in the embryo are lost. But the whole wheat flour
used to make chapaties, millet flours (bajra, jowar, ragi, etc.) used to make roti, contain all the nutrients
in the grain. It is important to know these facts.

General Fallacies
      It is said that cooking or processing vegetables results in loss of nutritive value. It is not a correct
statement. Cooking and processing improves the texture and flavour of vegetables. The loss of viamin
C in home cooked vegetables is only minimal (10 to 15 per cent), if the cooking water is retained.
174                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     It is said that water is: “fattening”. Water has no energy value. Even if it is held in the tissues, it
cannot be converted into fat.

“Natural Foods”, “Health Foods” and “Organic Foods”
      Most of the food items we buy are natural foods, as these are grown in our garden, or on a tree
or produced on a farm. Almost all foods are organic as they contain compounds having carbon,
hydrogen and oxygen. Most of the foods we eat provide the nutrients needed, so these can be called
health foods. But when these terms are used to describe some foods, the intended meaning is different.
      Thus when food is called “natural food”, it contains no added chemical, such as preservative,
emulsifier or antioxidant.
      Food grown on soils fertilised with manure, compost or vermiculture, without addition of any
chemical as fertiliser, pesticide or herbicide are called “organic foods”. These are generally more expensive
than those produced otherwise. But scientific study to evaluate the difference in major nutrient content
has shown none. A few minor variations occur indicating that the use of chemical fertilisers can help
introduce trace elements as needed but organic fertilisers cannot. Thus there is no advantage due to the
use of organic fertilisers.
      A food labelled as “Health food” implies that it must have some health-giving attributes, which
other foods do not have. This is not the case. Hence the use of the term “Health Foods” is inaccurate.

Study Questions
      1. What are the factors which you should consider for developing a food guide?
      2. List the five groups into which foods can be divided.
      3. Define a balanced diet.
      4. List the foods you include in your daily meals. Check and see if you use the amounts of food
         indicated in the daily food guide. If you don’t list the foods that are missing or present in
         smaller amounts.
      5. List the steps to be taken to conserve the food budget.
      6. Why is nutrition education important?
      7. Write short notes on:
           • Food fallacies.
           • Misconceptions about carbohydrate foods.
           • Organic foods.
                                                                         CHAPTER 15


           Meal Planning for the Family


Meal Planning
Objectives in Meal Planning
Nutritional Adequacy
Food Costs
   Energy Foods
   Protein Foods
   Vegetables and Fruits
Factors Affecting Food Selection
   Food Acceptance
   Tradition
   Food Misinformation
Other Aspects Affecting Food Selection
   Variety
Availability of Foods
   Home Production
Schedules of Family Members
Time
Family Size and Composition
Planning Process in Brief
Study Questions


                    “I never knew a man who did not like a kitchen fire,
                    Nor a woman, if she be away awhile, but would tire
                         Of inns and servants and would long to be
                  Back in her own kitchen, buttering toast and making tea.”
                                          (Grace Nell Crowell ‘Kitchen’ from White Fire, the South
                West Press, by permission of Mrs. Crowell and The Turner Company, Dallas, Texas)
176                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      MEAL PLANNING involves deciding what to eat day at each meal. It takes thought, effort and
use of knowledge acquired in the earlier chapters. As the family’s well-being and health are dependent
on how well they are fed, it is a challenge to every meal manager to meet it. It proves to be a satisfying
and rewarding experience, when done well.
      Each day we eat three meals and perhaps an additional snack. The various members of the family
partake of these meals. We need to plan the meals to ensure that the needs of each family member are
met. The plan can be flexible to take advantage of lower prices of seasonal foods, and to meet the needs
and choices of your family. But it has to be a plan. Meal planning can be done by the family as a joint
project. The family members can discuss the meal plans, the food budget and the actual preparation
and help in making the plans work. Such co-operation will lead to greater acceptance and enjoyment of
the meals. In Figure 15.1, the four steps involved in meat planning are pictorially depicted.



                                                                       Planning




                                                                    Purchasing




                                                                                 Preparation




                                                                       Serving




            Figure 15.1: The family’s meals — planning, purchasing, preparing and serving.


Meal Planning
      You must take into account the family members, their ages and occupation in planning family
meals. The food guide presented in Figure 15.2 will help in selecting foods. This will help you to decide
the amounts of foods needed from each group. As you learnt earlier, there is a large variety in the kinds
of foods within each food group, so it is possible to choose foods, which the family members like from
Meal Planning for the Family                                                                           177

each group. It is important to use seasonal vegetables and fruits, as these are not only of high quality,
but are available at reasonable price.
      The selection will also be guided by the schedules of the family members. All that you eat and
drink at home or outside, the cup of tea/coffee taken daily, the snaks served at meetings, the chana-
dana, which children eat in short recess, all form part of the daily food intake of the members. Planning
for these or at least an awareness of these, makes it easier for you to pick the foods that add up to meet
the needs of various family members.
      Meal planning is intimately connected with food purchase. In purchasing food, consider the
space available for storage and the conditions of storage. For example, if the space is limited, you may
have to purchase food often. If you have a refrigerator, you can buy vegetables and fruits once a week.
Thus now often you purchase foods is dependent on the space and conditions of storage.

Objectives in Meal Planning
      In planning meals your aim is:
       1. to satisfy the nutritional needs of the family members, according to their age and occupation.
       2. keep expenditure within your family’s food budget.
       3. to decide amounts of foods to be purchased from each food group.
       4. to consider family size and composition.
       5. To consider food storage space and conditions of storage, to decide how often you need to
           purchase various foods.
      In order to translate the meal plan into meals that meet the family’s needs, the following additional
steps have to be taken —
       6. Prepare a food purchase list, taking the food preferences of members into account.
       7. Use methods of preparation, which retain nutrients, without sacrificing palatability.
       8. Serve meals, which are appetising and attractive and fit in the schedule of the members.
       9. Manage the time, energy and available materials efficiently, with the help of the family
           members.
      If you make a weekly plan for all meals, you can save time, energy and money. It will also help
you to avoid monotonous meals.

Nutritional Adequacy
      The first prerequisite of a good meal plan is that it should meet the nutritional needs of the whole
family. This objective can be achieved by selecting foods according to the daily food guide (Figure
15.2). Thus each meal must include:
   Cereals and their products                      To provide energy and proteins.
   Dals, milk, egg, fish or meat                   To supply proteins, B-vitamins and some minerals.
   Protective vegetables and fruits                To provide vitamins A & C, minerals and fibre.
   Sugars, oils and fats                           To provide energy, satiety and improve palatability.
178                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


                                       1. Cereals and Breads




                                      2. Body-Building Foods




                                             3-5 servings–Children
                                        5 or more servings–Teenagers
                                          4 or more servings–Adults


                        3a. Green and Orange-                      3b. Vit. C-rich Fruits and
                        Yellow Vegetables Fruits                          Vegetables




                                          1 or more              1 or more



                                     4. Other Vegetables and Fruits




                                            5. Oils and Sugars




                                                25 gm or more of each




                                   Figure 15.2: A daily food guide.

      If you include the suggested number of units from each group, you can be reasonably assured of
meeting needs for protein, vitamins and minerals. The variety chosen within a group will be determined
by the taste preferences of the family members.
      Specific requirements for various periods of the life-cycle are made in the recommended dietary
intakes. These can easily be fulfilled by using more units from the food groups, which provide these
Meal Planning for the Family                                                                            179

nutrients. For example, a teenager may need six units from group two to meet his protein needs for
growth and maintenance, but an adult may need only three. An older person may be served the carrot
salad in grated form, while other members may be served carrot sticks; salads may be made without oil
seasoning for an overweight member, while others can have their salad seasoned. These are some of
the practical ways to suit the family meals to the nutritional needs of individual family members.
      Food is a basic necessity of life. It is important that sufficient part of the monetary resources are
set aside to meet the food needs of the family. If the allowance for food is low, there is a greater need
to plan meals carefully and to get the right foods to ensure nutritional adequacy for each member of the
family.

Food Costs
       You must remember that the price of food is not related to its nutritional contribution to the diet;
it is ruled by the law of demand and supply. The economics of food consumption is a broad subject,
but it is important to plan meals and buy food wisely so that maximum benefit is derived from the
money spent. First of all you must decide the total amount of money you can spend for food purchase.
Then you can select foods, which can be bought with the available money. Let us consider the economic
sources of various nutrients.
       Energy Foods: In Table 15.1 you can find the comparative cost of 100 calorie portion of various
foods. As you may observe, grains as well as starchy roofs are economical sources of food energy.
Grains supply proteins in addition to energy.
       Fats, oils, sugar and jaggery, which are used to make food palatable, are also sources of energy,
but these are expensive. Butter, ghee and vanaspati are good sources of Vitamin A.
       Protein Foods: Table 15.2, the cost of supplying five grammes of protein from various foods is
indicated. As you can see dals, whole beans and peas are the cheapest protein foods. Dehydrated fish
may be another inexpensive source. If you live near a river or the sea, fresh fish may be available at
competitive cost. Less expensive cuts of meat also can be used as protein. In the rural areas, eggs and
poultry is produced at home by some, thus ensuring economy.
                    Table 15.1: Comparative Cost of Energy-supplying Foods

      Food                         Cost/kg or liter 1        Quantity supplying      Cost of 100 Kcal
                                       (rupees)                  100 Kcal                 (paise)
      Wheat                              2.75                        30g                      8
      Rice                               4.50                        30g                     14
      Jowar, Ragi, Makka                 2.50                        30g                      7
      Dal, Pulse (whole)              8.00–12.00                     30g                   24–36
      Sugar                              5.00                       25 g                     12
      Oil                                22.00                       11g                     24
      Vanaspati                          25.00                       11g                     28
      Butter                             50.00                       13g                     65
      Ghee                               65.00                       11g                     71
      Milk                               5.25                       150g                     79
      Eggs                            7.20/dozen                  1.4 eggs                   83

       1. Based on retail prices in Bombay, January, 1988.
180                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                            Table 15.2: Comparative Cost of Protein Foods

      Food                         Cost/kg or liter 1         Quantity supplying       Cost of 5–6 g protein
                                                                 5 g protein                  (paise)
      Dal, Pulse (whole)               8.00–12.00                     25 g                    20–30
      Wheat                               2.75                        50 g                      14
      Jowar, Ragi, Makka                  2.50                     50–67 g                    13–17
      Rice                                4.50                        75 g                      34
      Milk                                5.25                        150 g                     79
      Eggs                            7.20/dozen                      1 egg                     60
      Meat, Fish                         25.00                        30 g                      75

       1. Based on retail prices in Bombay, January, 1988.

As you know, the choice of foods used will depend on your food acceptance pattern. Milk is an
important source of protein, though an expensive one. Some milk is needed at every stage of life.
       Vegetables and Fruits: Vegetables and fruits are important sources of minerals and vitamins.
Green leafy vegetables are a rich source of the vitamins, provitamin A, vitamin C, and the minerals
calcium and iron. The fruits amla, guavas, citrus fruits, pineapple and tomatoes are a good source of
vitamin C. Some vegetables and fruits are seasonal, while others are available throughout the year at a
competitive cost. Various greens are available throughout the year at very little cost. Vegetables and
fruits at the peak of the season are not only inexpensive, but are of high quality in terms of acceptability
and nutrient content. Tables 15.3 and 15.4 give the cost of supplying a fourth of day’s need for
provitamin A and vitamin C from various vegetables and fruits.
                           Table 15.3: Comparative Cost of Vitamin A Foods

       Food Source                                      Cost/100 g1              To provide 1/4 RDI2
                                                          (paise)             Amount      Cost in Paise
       Vegetables and Fruits—green and yellow
         Amaranth, Radish tops, Spinach, etc.                50               8–15 g             4–8
         Cabbage                                             25                62 g               15
         Carrots                                             30                40 g               12
         Orange                                              50                66 g               33
         Mango                                               80                27 g               22
       Fats
         Vanaspati                                           250               25 g               62
         Butter                                              500               20 g               100
         Ghee                                                650               18 g               117
       Animal foods
        Milk                                                 53                375 g              199
        Eggs                                                 120               37 g               4S
        Liver                                                200                3g                 6

       1. Prices of Foods in Bombay, January, 1988.
       2. RDI—Recommended Dietary Intakes.
Meal Planning for the Family                                                                            181

       In the rural areas it is possible to grow the vegetables and fruits needed in one’s kitchen garden.
In some parts of India it is customary to plant fruit trees around the house as soon as one plans to build
a house; thus ensuring a supply of fruit for the family.
       The food budget of rural agricultural families is different from that of the city dwellers. the staple
foods are normally available from the farms. With a little planning, they can produce the dals, vegetables
and fruits also for home consumption, so that the quality of their diets may improve.
       In estimating food cost, it is good to note that a number of non-food items are purchased at the
food store, for example, toilet soap, hair oil, cleaning agents and equipment. These may appear on the
bill, and must be subtracted from the total to get a correct idea about money spent for food. But the
money spent for snacks at work or in the school must be added to the food costs of the family.

Factors Affecting Food Selection
       Food Acceptance: Each one of us has certain foods we like; certain foods we do not like. But
food tastes can be cultivated. As we move from one place to another, we can enlarge our acquaintance
of foods, by trying the foods of that place. It helps us to enjoy our new environment. Learning new
ways of using availables foods is another way of bringing variety in meal planning.
       Tradition: Most of our food selection is influenced by tradition, be it national, regional or family
traditions. A lot of traditional selection is based on experience, but sometimes some poor practices
become part of a traditon and must be dispensed with.
                          Table 15.4: Comparative Cost of Vitamin C Foods1

      Food Source                      Cost/100 g                      To provide 1/4 RDI3
                                       EP2 (paise)                 Amount               Cost in Paise
      Amla                                 50                        2g                        1
      Guava                                50                        6g                        3
      Drumstick    Leaves4                 50                        15 g                      8
      Coriander leaves4                    50                        22 g                     11
      Cabbage 4                            25                        22 g                      6
      Radish   tops 4                      75                        30 g                     23
      Capsicum 4                           50                        22 g                     11
      Knol-khol/bittergourd4               50                        30 g                      6
      Drumsticks 4                         100                       22 g                     22
      Cauliflower4                         50                        45 g                     23
      Banana                               62                        60 g                     37
      Mausambi                             80                        25 g                     20
      Orange                               50                        40 g                     20
      Tomato                               30                        50 g                     15

   1. Based on prices in Bombay, January, 1988.
   2. EP-Edible portion
   3. RDI-Recommended Dietary Intakes.
   4. Amount of cooked vegetable is indicated.
182                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

        It is a good practice to evaluate traditional food selection in the light of knowledge of nutrition.
Thus we can retain good foods habits and change those that result in poor selection.
        Food Misinformation: Food is an important topic of conversation, articles in newspapers,
magazines and even books. You see and hear about it in advertisements too. Some of this information
may be useful, but a large part may not be. False ideas about food are common, as also wrong
information. But many of these originate in ignorance. But as you learn about food composition you
will be able to use this knowledge to guide food selection. It is your duty to spread the knowledge
gained to others so that they discard false ideas about food, which interfere with their food acceptance
and health.
        Other Factors Affecting Meal Planning—Skill in Food. Preparation: Skill in food preparation
is an essential part of an acceptable, enticing meal. Skill in food preparation is acquired by practice.
Ingenious combinations improve acceptability of foods, add to variety and thus make food enjoyable.
For example, some dark green leafy vegetables have strong flavour, which can be diluted by addition of
other, milder foods, or modified by addition of other ingredients. Methi leaves are bitter, if ground dal
or besan is added to it the bitter flavour is diluted and the mild flavour of the product is enjoyable;
similarly addition of grated coconut or jaggery also makes the flavour of the finished vegetable acceptable.
It is this skill that makes the flavour of the finished vegetable acceptable. It is this skill that makes a hot
soup at home more appetising than a meal at a first class restaurant. One can develop skill by observing
people who perform well and by practice. It is important to try and perfect the skills acquired, until it
becomes a habit.
        Variety: The enjoyment of food can be enhanced by learning ways to prepare dishes from other
regions of India and foreign countries. If a new dish prepared once a week, the monotony in meals is
avoided.

Availability of Foods
      It is important to study the seasonal variation in availability of foods. In each season one can find
some foods from each group. Using seasonal foods reduces cost. Some vegetables and fruits can be
grown in the kitchen garden. Some foods like beans, rice, wheat can be purchased soon after the time
of harvest, when the price is reasonable, and stored for the whole year.
      Home Production: If some of the vegetables and fruits are grown at home, these need to be used
in meal planning. Some of the fresh condiments such as coriander leaves, curry leaves, green chillies,
mint and different leafy vegetables can easily be grown at home.
      In rural areas where most of the staples are produced at home, meal planning helps to decide
realistically the amount of food the family should retain for home use, so that the needs of the family
are met. It also helps to decide what vegetables and fruits can be grown economically to improve the
family’s meal pattern, without adding to the food cost. When fruits and vegetables are produced in
excess of the family needs, the surplus can be sold.
      Schedules of Family Members: When planning a meal pattern, one needs to think of the schedules
(time-table) of the family members,—meal times and the number of meals eaten at home and those that
are eaten away from home. If packed lunches are made for the man of the house and children at
school, the menus need to be modified to ensure that the items can be packed and the menu is appetising
even when cold.
      Time available for meal preparation and the help available, in food preparation, be it from children
or hired help, may affect the choice of foods bought and the menu.
Meal Planning for the Family                                                                             183


Family Size and Composition
      The family size affects the foods that can be served. It is known that the money spent for food
per person decreases as the family size increases, when the family income remains constant. Such is
the case when there are several closely spaced children in the family. As the money available to the
family does not change with the size of family, a larger part of it has to be spent to meet the food needs.
Staples such as wheat, rice, jowar are bought in larger amounts, but the amount of milk, vegetables,
fruits bought may decrease. Thus the quality of the diet is lowered. In extreme cases, it may not be
possible to meet the food needs of the family members resulting in partial starvation. As this happens to
a large number of families, which migrate to cities in hope of improved living conditions, it is important
to emphasise the relation of family size to family’s food intake and health and promote small family
norms, in the interest of better health and survival. Table 15.5 indicates the availability of milk as related
to the per capita income.
      Family composition affects the kinds and amounts of food needed and the pattern of meals
served. For example, when children are below five years of age, more milk is needed, the number of
meals are more, as the child cannot take large amounts at a time. As the child grows the meal pattern
changes to accommodate the school hours and the need to pack lunch or snack may arise.
      Adolescents in the family need more food than adults, as they need large quantities of food to
support growth and their activities. The food needs of the adult members will depend on how active
they are. Older members of the family need lesser amounts of food, but may need change in consistency,
due to faulty teeth or lack of teeth.
      As festivals call for special menus, it is important to note these in making the food list.
                         Table 15.5: Income and Milk Purchased per Head

                         Per capita monthly income                 Milk purchased
                                 (in rupees)                    (ml. per head per day)
                                    < 100                                 245
                                   101–160                                316
                                   161–240                                377
                                   241–400                                441

                                    > 401                                 618


Planning Process in Brief
      It is necessary to plan on a monthly basis. There are five main steps in meal planning:
       1. Make a list of foods from each food group, that are available in the market.
       2. Check the prices and decide which of the foods from each group fit in the food budget on
            the basis of the number of family members.
       3. Estimate the day’s needs for all the family-members on the basis of the Daily Food Guide
            and calculate the month’s food needs from it.
       4. Make a list of foods to be purchased monthly, fortnightly, weekly and daily.
184                                                 Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

        5. Plan menus to meet the daily needs of the family.
       It is possible that some changes have to be made towards the end of the week to use up foods,
which may not keep. Sometimes an additional guest may result in change of menu.
       If the homemaker must prepare food, the plan should be made with economy of time and energy
in view. Making a food list ahead of time helps in conserving shopping time. Some dishes may be made
ahead of time, e.g., making halwa or laddu the day before the party. The plan must be related to
facilities available for food preparation. Some amount of standardisation occurs in the meal plans of
each family, which helps in efficient management of meals.

Study Questions
      1. List the objectives in planning meals. How can you ensure nutritional adequacy in meals?
      2. Discuss how to meet the nutritional needs at minimum food costs.
      3. What are the non-nutritional factors, which affect meal planning? Discuss.
                                                   CHAPTER 16


 Meal Planning for Various Age Groups


Adulthood
   Changing Food Habits
   Food Selection
   Breakfast an Important Meal
   Lunch—Often a Poor Meal
   Dinner
   Snacks
Nutrition During Pregnancy and Lactation
    Energy Needs
    Protein Needs
    Mineral Needs
    Craving for Certain Foods
    Nausea and Vomiting
    Constipation
Meeting the Dietary Needs of the
   Nursing Mother
   Modification of Normal Diet
   Factors Involved in Milk Secretion
Nutrition During Infancy
    Nutrient Requirements
    Water
    Breast-feeding
        Colostrum
        When Breast-feeding is Not Advisable
    Bottle Feeding
Supplementary Foods for Infants and Toddlers
   Kinds of Foods Given
   Helping Children, to Develop Good Food Habits
   Toddlers
Indications of Good Health
186                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      Meal Planning for School Children and Adolescents
         Needs of School Children (6–12 years)
         Spacing and Time of Meals
         Breakfast-the Neglected Meal
         Lunch
         Between Meal Snacks
         Meeting Food Needs of Adolescents
      Diet During 17–21 years
      Study Questions


      MEAL PLANNING for the family has been discussed earlier. It was mentioned that the needs of
individuals family members must be considered in estimating the food needs of the family. As the
family consists of various age groups in various physiological states, let us consider the needs of each
stage of life, starting with adulthood.

Adulthood
      Adulthood represents the steady state in life, when a person would have completed his/her growth
in terms of body size. The nutritional needs are for maintenance of body functions. The energy needs
in adulthood are mainly to sustain body functions and activity. The protein requirement is to be made
good the wear and tear and the losses, which occur as a result of normal life processes. Thus adult
stage is taken as a norm and requirements in other stages are discussed in relation to it.
      Adulthood also represents the productive stage of life. Therefore, it is important that the nutritional
needs of an adult be met adequately, so as to keep up vitality and a positive attitude in life, which are
essential for optimum productivity.
      Changing Food Habits: Each of us have foods, which are our favourites. These are served on
special occasions such as birthday, parties or other celebrations. Though one should take the likes and
dislikes of family members into account in meal planning, we should not allow our preferences to rule
our diets. Allowing people to develop a restricted food pattern may lead to a poorly balanced diet and
could be a social disadvantage. Trying to like new foods enlarges one’s food enjoyment, social experience
as well as diet.
      Food Selection: The selection of foods is made according to the daily food guide. The amounts
of foods included from the various groups will depend on the body size and activity of the individual.
Thus a labourer, who is very active may need more cereals and oils and fat to meet his/her energy
needs as compared to a sedentary person, who is involved in desk work. The foods selected need to be
used in the day’s meals, which fit into the daily schedule of the person.
      Breakfast an Important Meal: The first meal in the day is important as about 12 hours elapse
between dinner and breakfast. About one-fourth to one third of the day’s food should be taken for
breakfast. Rural agricultural families normally have a hearty breakfast. But in the cities the pattern
varies from region to region. Some regions have a certain definite pattern of breakfast and some
preparations are clearly associated with breakfast, e.g., idli-chatni, upma are considered as breakfast
foods in Tamil Nadu and Kerala, roasted ragi flour and milk, in Mysore, dahi-pohe, doodh-pohe in
western Maharashtra, paranthe and lassi in Punjab, etc.
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                    187

      In many urban families, it is customary to eat the fluid and soft dishes (such as rice, dal, dahi,
salads, etc.) in the meal at about 8.30 to 9 a.m. and pack and carry other items of the meal (such as
chapati, bread and butter, sandwiches, vegetables, chole, usal, pickle, etc.) in a lunch pack to work.
Thus in the cities, whatever food is eaten before leaving home for work constitutes a breakfast. It
usually consists of a cereal preparation, dal/fish/meat preparation, and curd/butter milk/milk, vegetables,
etc.
      Many persons, especially housewives and girls omit breakfast to reduce their food intake. But it
is known that a person, who eats a good breakfast, performs better at work and is likely to eat less
during the day. A person who skips breakfast has a tendency to take snacks or eat more at lunch and
dinner, thus increasing the total food intake. Protein content of snacks is usually low and the satiety
value is also low. Further comparative studies have shown that those who have good breakfasts have
a greater work output and are more alert.
      As many people in the cities and villages have to carry packed lunch, or select one from a limited
menu in snack counters, it is very important to plan breakfast to supply foods, which are sufficient
both in quality and quantity.
      Lunch Often a Poor Meal: About one-third of day’s food intake should be contributed by lunch
or the noon meal. Lunch should be counted as a part of food plan for the day, and not just a snack to
stave off hunger till dinner time.
      A good lunch should provide protein and protective foods, not just starchy foods. A common
eating pattern of many office workers is to have any available snack such as samosa, batata-vada,
pakodas, etc., or bread and butter and tea at the office canteen or at a cafe nearby. This is sometimes
improved when milk or a milk product like lassi, cold milk drink is taken instead of tea. Too often the
lunch pack from home may consist of chapati, bread and butter or puri-jam, chapati-pickle or chutney,
or potato bhaji, which are accompanied by a cup of tea/coffee. While these foods may be more filling
than the snack bought at work, they meet energy needs, without supplying much protein and protective
foods. It is important to include a serving of protein foods at lunch. Selection of vegetables or fruit
may help meet part of the need for protective foods.
      Lunch, whether served at home or packed and carried to work, or purchased at the place of
work, should be planned or chosen with care. A missed meal is not easily made up. Consistent neglect
of this important meal may affect the individual’s performance at work, behaviour with colleagues and
attitude to life adversely.
      The lunch should be planned in relation to the other needs, so that it supplies a fair share of the
day’s nutrients through the foods selected. A suggested daily food plan for the three meals is given in
Table 16.1.
      Dinner: This is the main meal of the day, which may be served at noon or night, depending on
the family’s schedule or custom. It is good to plan a menu for dinner which helps to balance the total
intake in terms of energy, protein as well as other nutrients for the day. One may prepare an additional
vegetable and salad, one may also add a dessert or sweet, to add to the variety. The active members
may eat more heartily of the cereal dishes, while the person who has to watch his weight may eat more
of salads and vegetables. As this is a leisurely meal, which is eaten by the family together, it contributes
much to the feeling of belonging, enjoyment of the company and relaxation.
      Snacks: It has become an accepted practice in most offices and factories for workers to have a
tea break. Most of the canteens and cafes, which serve tea and coffee, also serve snacks, most of
which are shallow or deep fat fried preparations. Thus the tea break provides an opportunity to eat as
188                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

well as drink. The choice of the snack may decide if it will provide only energy or energy plus other
nutrients. Dishes such as batata-vada, vegetable patties, pakodas may contribute little but calories, and
may dull the appetite, while dahi-vada, idli-sambhar, misal, sweetened milk, lassi, icecream, chana-
dana, fruits, may provide some nutrients in addition to energy.
      It is not possible and desirable to make rigid rules about between meals eating. It may be wise to
choose such snacks as add to the nutrient intake, especially when these are intended to meet wholly or
partly the need for a meal. Some suggestions for these snacks are milk or milk beverages, cereal-dal or
dal-milk or cereal-milk mixed dishes, salads and fruits.
                                   Table 16.1: Food Plan for a Day.

        The daily food plan                                   Sample menu

        Milk (2 servings)                                 Breakfast
        Dal (2 servings)                                    Shira/upma, milk, banana, tea
        Vegetables (3 servings)
        Fruit (1 serving)                                 Lunch
        Cereals (10 servings)                               Rice, chapati, dal, vegetable beans,
        Sugar                                               carrot and cabbage mixed salad,
        Oil, fat                                            dahi/lassi
        Breakfast                                         Tea
          Cereal and milk, fruit                            Tea, bread and butter
        Lunch                                             Dinner
          Cereals, dal, two vegetables, dahi                Rice, roti, dal, leafy vegetables, dahi
        Dinner
          Cereals, dal, leafy vegetables, dahi.


Nutrition During Pregnancy and Lactation
      Pregnancy and lactation are two stages of life when an adult women’s needs are increased. She
has the responsibility of supporting the growth of the foetus internally during the nine months of
pregnancy and later externally by nursing the infant. Since the growth needs at the commencement of
life are crucial, good nutrition is a must for the expectant as well as nursing mother. A number of
tissues are formed to protect and sustain the foetus. During pregnancy the mother has to meet her own
needs and the needs of the growing foetus. There is additional need for the growth of other related
tissues and to build-up fat stores to cushion the foetus, prior to birth, and to supply part of the energy
needed for milk formation during lactation. Thus the need for all nutrients involved in tissue synthesis
is increased during pregnancy (Figure 16.1).
      Adolescent mothers, who have not completed their own growth, may need additional foods to
meet their own growth requirements. If these are not met, their health may be affected, which may
indirectly affect the welfare of the foetus. If the mother’s diet has been adequate before pregnancy, she
may be in a better position to meet the demands of pregnancy.
      No mother would like to injure the health of her baby through poor food habits. However, nutritional
studies have shown that many women attend to the needs of other family members at the expense of
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                 189

their own needs. The situation does not change during pregnancy. Thus pregnant women are often the
most poorly fed members of the family. In her effort to take care of others, she does not take time to
sit down and eat. When she is very tired she is unable to eat. If the food supply is limited, she is the
worst affected, as she feeds all other members and eats what is left. It is important that the family
should plan the arrival of the baby so that the pregnant mother does not suffer from lack of food both
in terms of amount and kind. The expectant father must try to ensure that the expectant mother gets
the right amounts and kinds of foods, so that the health of the foetus does not suffer.
Energy Needs
      The Advisory Committee of the Indian Council for Medical Research recommends an increase of
300 calories per day in the latter half of pregnancy. As growth of the foetus is very rapid in the second
half of pregnancy, it is important that the increased need for energy is met.
      Enough energy food should be supplied to ensure that the dietary protein is used for building new
tissues, and not to meet need for energy. During first part of pregnancy the demand for extra energy is
small and is taken care of by the reduced activity.




           Age – 7-8 months      9 years   25 years Sedentary Pregnant     Moderate Activity
           Calories – 865        2050      1900               2200         2200
           Protein – 14g         36 g      45 g               59 g         45 g
           Body Weight – 8 kg    25 kg     45 kg              55 kg        45 kg



       Figure 16.1: Energy and protein needs vary with age, occupation and physiological stage.

      If the mother is within a few kilogrammes of the ideal weight for her body build, a gradual weight
gain of up to 9-10 kg appears to be desirable. Under weight mothers may be encouraged to gain more
weight, while those gaining too much weight may be advised to restrict their weight gain during
pregnancy. Exact factual data about the most desirable weight gain and the significance of different
rates of gain is not available.
      The additional energy is used for building of new tissues, which is evident from the higher basal
metabolic rate accompanying it, and also for the movement and activities of the larger body in the later
part of pregnancy.
Protein Needs
    Additional protein is necessary for growth of the foetus, new maternal tissues and to prepare the
mother for lactation. The ICMR recommends 14 g of protein daily during the second half of pregnancy.
190                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     The protein should be of good quality, e.g., milk, eggs, fish, meat, etc. Good quality may be
achieved by combining sources of protein in the diet. Some of it could be supplied by milk and milk
products.
Mineral Needs
       The need for minerals, which form a part of body structure is increased with pregnancy. Calcium
and phosphorus are needed for formation of bones and teeth. The teeth formation starts early in
prenatal life, so it is important that the mother gets sufficient calcium from the beginning of pregnancy.
       Iron is needed for the synthesis of additional volume of blood and other tissues formed during
development of the foetus. The store of iron is built in prenatal period, because milk, the infant’s main
food during first three to four months after birth, is deficient in iron. It is now a common practice for
the doctor to give expectant mothers a prescription for an iron salt. Though this is true, foods rich in
iron should be emphasised in the diet. The mother will need to continue to eat a diet high in iron after
delivery also, to make up for some of the losses at the time of childbirth. A number of foods traditionally
prepared for feeding a nursing mother in the early part of lactation are rich in iron.
       Iodine: There is an additional need for iodine at this stage in life. If mother’s iodine intake is low,
the infant may suffer from cretenism, a disease which is characterised by retarded physical and mental
development. The iodine deficiency disease in adults is simple goitre.
       In areas where the soil and water are deficient in iodine, the use of iodised salt is recommended.
       Craving for Certain Foods: This may be due to psychological need for attention. It may be
satisfied, if these do not conflict with the meeting of nutritional needs.
       Nausea and vomiting may be common in early part of the pregnancy. A high carbohydrate diet,
consisting of bland preparations, given as small frequent feedings, is likely to be beneficial. It is advisable
to avoid strong flavours, e.g., strong coffee or tea, spicy and oily foods.
       Constipation: Constipation is one of the complaints in pregnancy, because the enlarged uterus
may press against the intestines and prevent normal movement. There is a tendency to decrease or
minimise physical activity. This is not advisable, as exercise not only helps elimination but also keeps
the body fit. Generally, some of the aids to regular elimination, which help in all stages of life, may be
practised everyday to maintain good health in pregnancy. These are:
        1. Drink more water. A glass or two taken before breakfast are often helpful. Some people find
            warm water more helpful than cold.
        2. Eat the right foods. Include plenty of vegetables and fruits, especially green leafy vegetables,
            fresh fruits, raw salads, whole-grain preparations.
        3. Eat at regular hours. Eat slowly.
        4. Take some exercise daily to help movement, improve breathing and help the body to relax. A
            number of exercises can be performed regularly. Walking is a good and easy exercise.
        5. Develop regular toilet habit. Early in the morning or, after the first cup of tea is a good time
            for a bowel movement.

Meeting the Dietary Needs of the Nursing Mother
      It is recommended that the diet of a nursing mother should supply 700 calories in addition to her
normal needs. This helps her to meet the demands of extra energy for lactation. Additional protein and
other nutrients are also needed. The additional amounts recommended are indicated in the list. The
increase in requirements is related to the amount of milk produced (Table 16.2).
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                 191

     Intake of high quality protein helps in improved secretion of milk. The intake of minerals, calcium,
phosphorus, iron, iodine and vitamins, A, D, B-complex and C should be increased during lactation.
        Table 16.2: Additional Amounts of Nutrients Recommended During Lactation

             Nutrient                                       Additional amount recommended

             Energy                                                    700 kcal
             Protein                                                    20 g
             Calcium                                                   600 mg
             Iron                                                        nil
             Vitamin A                                400 mcg retinol or 1600 mcg beta-carotene
             Thiamin                                                   0.3 mg
             Riboflavin                                                0.4 mg
             Niacin                                                    5.0 mg
             Vitamin C                                                  40 mg


                          Table 16.3: Additional Foods for Nursing Mother

   Foods                                           Amount              Calories           Protein
   Plan 1
   Wheat, jowar, bajra or ragi                       90 g                 305              8–11g
   Dal, pulse, milk, fish or egg                     1S                   100              5–6g
   Garden cress seeds (haliv)                        20 g                  90                5
   Leafy or orange yellow vegetable/fruit            50 g                  25                2
   Oil, any fat, butter or ghee                      20 g                 180               —
                                                  Total intake            700              20–24
   Plan 2
   Cereals                                        75 to 100 g           260–340             5–10
   Dal/Pulse                                       20–25 g              85–100              5–6
   Milk                                                1C                 120                 6
   Garden cress seeds                                 10g                  45                 2
   Amaranth or any dark green leafy veg.              75 g                 35                 3
   Oil, fat                                        10–20 g              90–180               —

                                                  Total intake          635–715            21–27

      Modification of Normal Diet. A modification of the normal basic diet is worked out for a
nursing mother. It may be observed that additional amounts of protein and energy foods are included in
this diet. In most regions, it is customary to feed the nursing mother additional amount of fat (ghee)
which supplies energy and vitamin A or some special preparations (Lahia, laddus of methi, mung,
garden cress seeds), which contain sources of protein, iron, calcium and vitamins B. It is advisable to
analyse the nutritional contribution of such products, so that one can emphasise those, which help to
meet the additional need for nutrients (Table 16.3).
192                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Factors Involved in Milk Secretion
      Besides optimal diet others factors affect milk production. The mother’s desire to feet the baby is
a very important factor. A mother, who subconsciously thinks of nursing as an imposition on her
personal freedom, or something which may affect her figure adversely, may not be able to nurse her
baby. Her subconscious reaction may affect secretion of milk adversely. It may not be inopportune to
mention that these fears are baseless. Normal lactation helps the mother to regain her natural figure
effortlessly. A mother, who does not nurse her baby, may need to exercise more vigilance to avoid
losing her figure, than a mother, who is able to nurse her baby.
      A calm, quiet life favours maximal secretion of milk. Fear, worry, grief, anxiety, excitement,
anger, tend to retard milk secretion. While moderate exercise helps milk secretion, excessive exercise
depresses it. A comfortable seat, a calm atmosphere, freedom from pre-occupations and quiet are
essential during nursing a baby. It is important for the nursing mother to have a happy family, which
gives her emotional support during this stage of life, which is physically and psychologically very
demanding and imposes restrictions on her personal freedom. This was well appreciated by our
forefathers. The custom of sending an expectant mother to her parents and her stay with them for
three to six months after delivery, used to ensure pleasant atmosphere for the mother and child.

Nutrition During Infancy
      Proper feeding of infants is necessary to ensure normal growth and development. Infancy is the
period of most rapid growth when one considers the period from birth to adulthood. The foundations
of future health is laid during the first year of life. Breast milk is the first normal food for the baby. It
provides the nutrients needed in a proportion suited to the infants rapid growth needs. This is a period
in which the capacity of the stomach of the infant and ability to digest various foods components
changes rapidly (Figure 16.2). Therefore, breast feeding is thought to be very important during this
period. Each child grows according to his/her potential and individual progress is noted to record
growth and development.
Nutrient Requirements
      The need for energy is highest per unit of body-weight in the first year of life, as compared to the
subsequent years of growth up to adulthood. The high energy needs in due to high basal metabolic rate,
the energy requirement for growth and activity. The energy need decreases from second year to
adulthood. The energy need for activity is very much variable, with an active infant using 40 per cent
of the total energy and quiet babies using only 15 per cent of the total energy for activity.
      The Indian Council of Medical Research recommends that calorie allowance for 1–6 months be
118 cal per kg and 7–12 months 108 cal per kg. When these energy needs are compared with those of
an average young adult, which are from 40–50 calories per kg body-weight, the high energy needs of
an infant beome apparent. The relatively high need for energy of an infant is understandable, when we
note that an average infant doubless his birth weight in the first five months of life and trebles it by the
end of the first year.
      Satisfactory weight gain is one of the simple indications of successful feeding of the baby.
      As the body growth is rapid, it is accompanied by building of large amounts of body tissues. It is
necessary to provide protein of high quality to sustain this rapid building process. As the body growth
includes the building of strong bones and teeth, the infant’s need for the minerals, calcium and phosphorus
is high. Breast milk or Cow’s milk supply these minerals in sufficient amounts, if an adequate quantity
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                    193

is taken daily. As the infant grows older, other sources such as green leafy vegetables and ragi are
added to the diet to meet calcium needs.
      During the last trimester of pregnancy, the well-nourished foetus builds up iron stores, so that at
birth the infant has sufficient iron, stored to meet his/her needs for the first four to five months of life.
Milk, which is the first food of the infant, is considered a complete food, but it is low in iron. A food
supplement, which supplies iron, needs to be added, to the infant’s diet, by the age of five to six
months, when it is needed.
      When the mother is well fed, the breast milk furnishes sufficient amount of vitamins, the only
exception being vitamin D and perhaps vitamin C. The same is true for substitute milk used in infant
feeding, except the fact that it contains insufficient amounts of vitamin C. Therefore, sweet lime,
orange juice or some other juice high in vitamin C is usually added as one of the first supplements to the
infant’s diet. The other supplement is a vitamin D concentrate, which is added in the form of fish liver
oil.




                                         at Birth Capacity:
                                         2 Tablespoons or
                                                30 ml




                                                           at 2 weeks
                                                            Capacity:
                                                        4 Tablespoons or
                                                              55 ml




                                                        at 3 months
                                                         Capacity:
                                                     8 Tablespoons or
                                                           120 ml




                        Figure 16.2: Baby’s stomach–actual size at different ages.

Water
     An infant is sometimes referred to as a bubble of water, due to its high proportion of body water.
A baby has a high surface area per unit of body-weight, breathes faster, and therefore loses a lot of
194                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

water, especially when he is dressed in warm clothing in warm, humid weather. He needs more water
than adults to excrete body wastes. Therefore, an infant needs about 160 ml of water per kg per day.
Though most of the needs is met by milk, it is necessary to give boiled, cooled water between feedings.
Breast Feeding
      Human milk is more readily assimilated than cow’s milk, for it is produced to suit the baby’s
digestive system. Breast milk is free from contamination, and is available at the right temperature
without effort.
      Breast feeding prolongs the period of natural immunity to virus diseases. These include mumps,
measles, polio, some kinds of pneumonia and some infantile diarrhoeas. Babies fed on breast milk are
also less likely to develop constipation and certain common infant allergies. Breast feeding does make
possible an exceptionally close and harmonious relationship that is enjoyable and satisfying to both
infant and mother. It should also be mentioned that in the case of a major disaster, which disrupts the
supply services (water, milk, electricity, etc.), a baby’s survival may depend on breast feeding. Another
consideration in this atomic age is the presence of radioactive fallout as strontium–90. The consensus
of scientific thought is that the amount of contamination in breast milk is likely to be smaller than in
formula milk.
      Human milk is specifically made to meet the needs of human infants. The best commercial
formulas therefore are modified from cow’s/buffalo’s milk to approximate the known composition of
human breast milk.
      Unfortunately, even today, the increasing trend towards bottle feeding results in increased infant
sickness and mortality, due to (i) ignorance of the basic rules of sanitation, (ii) insanitary preparation
and poor handling of bottles and milk formula, and (iii) use of milk substitutes of poor nutrient content.
      Though the mortality rate for artificially fed infants has been greatly reduced, it is still high for
this group, especially in the lower economic groups. This may be due to lack of water for cleaning,
high ambient temperature, lack of facilities for making the formula and lack of refrigeration. Mothers in
this group do not have proper instructions in formula preparation and storage of prepared formula. An
adequate diet, exercise, rest, and freedom from anxiety are important during prenatal period as well as
during lactation.
Colostrum
      The secretion from the breast in the first few days after delivery, is called colostrum. It has a high
protein and vitamin A content and confers an immunity to certain infections during the first few
months. It aids the development of the digestive enzymes. Therefore, it is important that the new born
is breastfed from the first day and should be fed colostrum within an hour after birth.
When Breast Feeding is not Advisable
   Breast feeding must be discontinued when:
    1. Mother suffers from chronic illnesses such as tuberculosis, epilepsy, insanity, chronic fevers,
       severe anaemia, nephritis or cardiac disease.
    2. The infant is weak or unable to nurse due to cleft palate or harelip.
    3. Temporary stoppage of breast feeding is advisable when the mother acquires an acute infection,
       which the baby has not yet got. In scuh a condition the mother must empty out the breasts
       at regular intervals manually or with a pump, to prevent the milk supply from drying up.
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                  195

      There are no other reasons to stop breast feeding. It must be continued even if child has loose
stools, is vomiting or has any minor or major illness.
      When the child is unable to suck because of illness, breast milk can be expressed and fed.
Bottle Feeding
      When a child needs to be bottle fed, most widely used substitute for human milk is cow’s or
modified buffalo’s milk. The substitutes differ from human milk in composition. Table 16.4 gives
comparison of human milk with milk of other species.
      It may be noted that the protein content of these is about three times that of human milk. The type
of protein present is also different. The fat content is similar in the milk of these species. Human milk
contains about twice as much lactose as cow’s or buffalo’s milk. The energy supplied per 100 ml is
about the same. Cow’s milk contains more than three times as much mineral ash as human milk. This
creates a high solute load for the kidneys to excrete. This problem is corrected by diluting the milk.
Sugar is added to counteract the effect of dilution on energy supply.
      The modifications made in cow’s or buffalo’s milk to prepare commercial formulas are:
       1. Protein content is usually lowered; if possible, protein is treated to produce soft curd.
       2. Carbohydrate such as glucose or sucrose is added.
       3. Butter fat is reduced, if need be.
       4. Calcium level is reduced by dilution.
       5. Vitamins A, D and ascorbic acid are usually added.
       6. Iron may be added.
                 Table 16.4: Composition of Milk from Various Species (per 100 ml)1

            Nutrients                  Human        Cow’s         Goat’s      Buffalo’s       Ass’s
                                        milk        milk           milk         milk          milk
       Energy (kcal)                     65           67            72           117           48
       Protein (g)                      1.1          3.2           3.3           4.3           2.1
       Fat (g)                          3.4          4.1           4.5           8.8           1.5
       Carbohydrate (g)                 7.4          4.4           4.6           5.0           6.5
       Minerals (g)                     0.1          0.8           0.8           0.8           —
       Calcium (mg)                      28          120           170           210           80
       Phosphorus (mg)                   11           90           120           130           —
       Iron (mg)                         —           0.2           0.3           0.2           —
       Vitamin A (mcg)                   42           52            54            48           —
       Thiamin (mcg)                     20           50            50            40           60
       Riboflavin (mcg)                  20          190            40           100           30
       Niacin (mcg)                      —           100           300           100           100
       Vitamin C (mg)                    3            2             1             1            10

   1. Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, 1971.
196                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Supplementary Foods for Infants and Toddlers
      Introduction of First Solid Foods: The age at which the first solid is introduced and the types
of food given is dependent on who decides this–the parents, grandparents or other relatives. It also
depends on whether the family has access to a pediatrician, a family doctor, a health visitor, or a
primary centre nurse. The advice will vary from one region of India to another.
      In most regions there is a feast to celebrate this occasion. The first solid foods are normally
introduced at five to six months of age. The foods given are cereals, cereal-milk or cereal/dal preparations
such as suji halwa, rice-milk, upma, rice-dal, khichdi, pongal, bread, rice flakes/poha, etc. Fruits such
as ripe banana, mango, papaya, which are soft and pulpy are also given. Well cooked, non-fibrous
vegetables such as ashgourd, potato, pumpkin are fed along with rice.
      It is important to make this transition to solid foods an enjoyable one. The amount of food offered
and swallowed in the beginning is a teaspoon or so. It is normal for the infant to bring the food out, for
the ability to swallow is developed very slowly. The infant enjoys this transition, if the mother is relaxed
at the time of feeding and the food is not forced. The infant can accept the food better, if it is not
distracted by other activities while feeding.
      The number and kinds of foods given are slowly increased as the child approaches the first
birthday. By the end of the second year, the toddler is able to partake of the normal family meals.
The Kinds of Foods Given
      The first food fed is normally cooked cereals, which are prepared for the family or prepared baby
cereals may be purchased. The cereal must be thoroughly cooked, if coarse, it should be strained. The
cereal at first is mixed with milk, curd, buttermilk or dal soup. The amount given is gradually increased
to four or five teaspoons by the seventh or eighth month.
      Dal: Soft cooked dal (varan), dal soup can be mixed with rice and fed. Mixed preparation such
as khichdi or pongal (rice and mung dal), idli (rice and urad dal), dhokla (chana dal and dahi), and
any similar preparations can be fed by seven to eight months of age.
      Fruits, Mashed, Strained: Fruits such as banana, mangoes, papaya, etc., are started at about five
months of age. Cooked or baked apples may also be fed after removal of skin and other fibrous parts.
Mild flavoured fruits in small amounts are a good choice to begin with.
      Vegetables: Cooked and mashed or strained vegetables in small amounts can be added a little to
the cereal by six to eight months. By the end of first year, the consistency of vegetables fed to the baby
should be changed over gradually to chopped or coarsely mashed cooked vegetables. The baby needs
to learn to like different flavours and textures. The addition of vegetables and fruits helps to achieve this
objective.
      Egg: Egg yolk can be given to the infant between the age of four to six months of age. The yolk
contains protein, iron and vitamins which are valuable additions to the baby’s diet. Hard cooked egg
yolk seems to agree well with the babies. A very small amount is given in the beginning. The white of
the egg is given only by the end of first year, as some babies are allergic to it.
      Fish and Meat: Cooked ground and strained fish and meat may be given about the same time as
egg yolk at five to six months of age. The fish or meat serving may be alternated with egg yolk and dal.
      Feeding Schedules: Modern trend is to have flexible feeding schedules and not rigid. These are
based on signs of hunger in the individual infant rather than on fixed hours of feeding. After the first
few weeks, a healthy infant will develop a self-regulated feeding schedule of this own. The number of
feeds will reduce to about six by the time the infant is six months of age.
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                    197

      A very small amount of each new food should be added to the infant’s diet. New foods should be
introduced gradually, one at a time to permit the infant to get used to it. The foods should be of soft,
smooth consistency. It is normal for an infant to bring out the food in the beginning until the ability to
swallow is established. The child should be encouraged to try new flavours and textures.
      The amount of feed should be increased as the number decreases. By the beginning of the second
year, the baby will have three to four meals. The foods included for a good daily diet for a one year old
child are given in Table 16.5.
                               Table 16.5: Diet for One Year Old Child.

      Milk                    2 to 3 cups             Fruit for Vitamin C         1 serving
      Dal                     2 tablespoons           Other Fruit                 1/4 cup
      Egg                     1                       Rice*                       1/4 cup (cooked)
      or Meat or Fish         2 tablespoons           Chapati/bread               1/2 to 1 chapati or
                                                                                  sliced bread
      Cooked green or         2 tablespoons           Butter/ghee
      yellow vegetable                                vanaspati                   1 teaspoon
      Other vegetables        2 tablespoons           Fish liver oil              Enough to supply 5
      including potatoes                                                          mcg (200 I.U.)
                                                                                  vitamin D

   *Rawa, ragi, jowar, pohe or any other cereal could wholly or partially replace rice.

Helping Children to Develop Good Food Habits
     Most of the problems of food acceptance begin in the toddler stage. The problem starts with the
mother, who thinks that the child should be well fed, and tries to feed the child more food than it needs.
The child will show a marked decrease in appetite in the second year, because the child grows at a
slower rate in the second year as compared to the first year. So it is important to give small portions of
food and let him/her enjoy food. Allow the child some freedom to decide when he/she is satisfied.
Allow some flexibility in choices and help the child form good food habits gradually. Learning is a slow
process and is helped by the adults having patience and a sportive attitude, never by bribe, admonition
or punishment.

Toddlers
      Children can share family meals, by the time, they are two years old. A few alternatives may be
needed, when the family makes highly spiced food. It is advisable to keep foods, which are too fatty or
too sweet out of the child’s menu. Such foods may fill his limited space, without providing the nutrients
needed. The child may be encouraged to eat sweets towards the end of the meal, so that he/she may
not eat these to the exclusion of other foods.
      It is good to give appetising beverages such as fruit juices and milk to the children. It is good to
serve part of his milk needs in the form of soups, kheer, custard or icecream. Fruits are ideal snacks.
Crisp crackers or toast are liked and the child can eat these without help, which helps him to feel
independent.
198                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Indications of Good Health
       Some indications are visible, and can be measured and recorded, others are qualitative, and not
easily recorded.
       The most common measurable criterion is regular gain in weight. At birth an average healthy
baby weights about three to three and half kg. A little loss of weight is observed in the first few days,
but it is regained within two weeks. From this point, the child gains weight regularly. It doubles its birth
weight between four to six months of age and triples it by the end of 10–12 months. Therefore, slow
weight gain or stationary weight is the first indication of something amiss in the infant care.
       Other signs of good health are rosy cheeks, bright eyes, firm layer of subcutaneous fat, normal
eruption of teeth, good sleep and regular elimination. A healthy baby is a happy baby.

Meal Planning for School Children and Adolescents
      Once the child starts going to school, the attention of the parents is diverted to his/her school
work and food becomes a secondary matter. As a result the nutritional needs of the child of school age
are often overlooked. If the child was well-nourished as he entered school, the effect of neglect during
school years does not show up for some time.
      The nutritional needs do not change very much during school years except for a gradual increase
in food intake to meet the needs of the growing body. But going to school does mean that the meals and
activities have to be planned to fit in the school schedule. It is necessary to eat one meal away from
home, wich may be a box lunch or snacks bought at school.
Food Needs of the School Child — 6–12 Years Old
      At this stage it is important to ensure that each meal carries sufficient amounts of protein, minerals
and vitamins. The food needs are increased in keeping with the child’s growth rate and activity. The
kinds of food needed are the same as those for younger children but the amounts needed are increased.
The children of this age can take most of the foods served in the family meals, except highly spiced or
fried foods, strong tea and coffee. The child can take all fruits at this age, including those which have
seeds as guavas and grapes which were not suitable at a younger age. He can eat many foods, which
need biting and chewing such as popped cereals, roasted groundnuts and bengal gram, roasted corn on
the cob, amla, bor, etc.

Spacing and Time of Meals
      Children usually need four or five meals. The child should be encouraged to get up about half an
hour before breakfast. About twenty minutes may be needed for the meal. When the child goes to
school, its a good idea to allow about half an hour between breakfast and school time for the child to
get ready. Lunch time should be midway between breakfast and dinner. Some children need a mid-
morning as well as, a mid-afternoon snack.

Breakfast the Neglected Meal
      With the need to adjust to the school time, the first meal is either scanty or omitted entirely. This
is a hazard from the nutritional point of view. For a missed meal is hard to make up. There are many
reasons why a child dons not have a good breakfast. The breakfast may not be ready in time and
therefore the child may not be able to eat it and reach the school in time. The child may not get up in
time and therefore the breakfast may be hurried. If the child does not go to bed in time, it is difficult for
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                  199

him to get up early enough to find time to get ready for school and eat a good breakfast. The child’s
ability to attend classes and learn his lessons at school may be affected, if he is hungry during school
hour, due to a poor breakfast.
      Breakfast can be a very enjoyable and varied meal. Some of the traditional breakfasts from some
regions are given in Table 16.6.
                                   Table 16.6: Regional Breakfast

               Region                           Breakfast foods

               Punjab                           Parantha and lassi

               Maharashtra                      Shira and milk, Dahi-pohe, Doodh-pohe

               Madras                           Idli chutney and coffee, Dosa Chuteney &
                                                Coffee, milk beverage

               Mysore                           Ragi preparation and butter milk

               Modern pattern in all regions    Bread and butter, egg, fruit, milk, tea/coffee


    A good breakfast should include some cereal or cereal dal preparation, some milk and fruit.
However, if the fruit is preferred at some other time in the day, it may be omitted from the breakfast.

Lunch
       This meal may have to be eaten away from home, which is a major change for the child at this
stage. It requires considerable planning and management to ensure that a child is well fed even when
she/he eats away from home. The foods, which must find a place in the packed lunch include—(a)
cereal preparation such as chapati, upma, bread, etc., (b) pulse or milk product, which may be usal,
dal, til chutni, curd, lassi, milk or roasted groundnuts, (c) vegetable preparation or fruit. You can make
one dish, which contains foods from all the three groups, in which oil, butter, ghee, sugar and/or
jaggery are hidden or visible ingredients. Some preparations, which are children’s favourites, are:
     • Masalabhaat (made with rice, mung dal and vegetable–cabbages, carrots, peas).
     • Thalipeeth (made from a mixture of cereals and pulses flour and vegetables.
     • Dahi-bhaat, tomato or cucumber slices and lemon pickle.
     • Shira, milk and fruit (banana, grapes, guava, orange).
     • Sandwiches of cheese or paneer, tomato and cucumber.
     • Chapati, usal and carrot salad.
       As you can see there are many more variations, which can be made from foods from the groups
indicated. When the children eat with their friends and share their lunch with them at school, it improves
their enjoyment of the meal. Such sharing may enlarge their food exposure and add variety.
       There are some points, which must be remembered, in making a packed lunch, which is enjoyable.
These are:
     • Cool the preparation before packing to avoid spoilage.
     • Pack food preparations, which taste good even when these are cold.
200                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      •   Include some fresh vegetable or fruit, to help moisten the mouth.
      •   Pack the vegetable/fruit slices in a plastic bag, to retain fresh flavour and texture.
      •   Pack only as much as the child can eat happily, so that children learn to value food and do not
          waste it.
Between Meal Snacks
      Some children may need a mid-morning and a mid-afternoon snack. A number of foods are
normally available, these include fruits such as guavas, bananas, amlas, bor, etc. roasted legumes such
as groundnuts, chanas, etc. These are available near school in addition to the snacks sold in the school
canteen. If well chosen, these snacks can provide important nutrients in addition to calories. If the
children buy candy, peppermints, soft drinks, ice fruit, they get mainly calories only. These foods
reduce or dull the appetite, without meeting the body’s need. Such foods supply only energy. Therefore,
these foods are said to provide only “empty calories”.
The Adolescent—12–16 years
      This is a stage of rapid growth and intense activity. Individual variation is also great in this age
group. A number of physical, emotional and mental changes occur in this period of life. Girls mature
between 11 and 13 years of age, whereas the major changes occur in boys between 13 and 15 years.
      It is normal for boys to eat a lot at this age, especially if they are fond of outdoor sports. The need
to meet their nutritional needs through good planning cannot be overemphasised.
      It may be noted from the table of recommended allowances that the need for all nutrients is
increased at adolescence. Therefore, it is important to plan to supply sufficient amounts of proteins,
minerals and vitamins in each meal.
      Adolescence is the age of group activities. Therefore, if nutrition education is imparted as a group
activity, it may help in improving eating habits.
Meeting Food Needs of Adolescents
      The increased needs of this period can be met if increased amounts of foods listed in the daily
guide are included in the diet. Boys may need to consume a lot of energy rich foods, in order to provide
sufficient energy.
      Girls may need to pay special attention to foods rich in protein, iron and other nutrients necessary
for synthesis and regeneration of red blood cells. The girl’s diet should include all foods listed in the
food guide, with special attention to iron rich foods such as dals, leafy green vegetables, dried fruits
and egg, liver and red meats may also be used if acceptable.
      It is important for adolescents to gain appropriate weight for their height and body build. Any
deviation from normal indicates some feeding problem, which must be identified and corrected with
the help of a nutritionist or dietician. Checking a three day food intake record, may help in identifying
the specific lack or excess and thus form the basis of a plan of action.

Diet During 17–21 years
      Growth is usually slow in this stage of life. But there is certain degree of maturation of the body
tissues, which is aided by good nutrition.
      If the boys and girls are away in hostels, they tend to economise on food, especially if the food
charges are collected on the basis of meals eaten.
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                     201

       A number of institutions (colleges/universities) provide accommodation and food at moderate
cost to this age group; part of the establishment cost is paid as subsidy by the government to reduce
food cost to the college students.
       It is necessary to educate this group about the relationship between the food intake and body’s
needs to store up nutrients in preparation for the responsibilities of adulthood.
       Nutrition for Middle Age Adults (40 – 60 yrs.)
       Often the middle years are a stage of stability in life. Normally the person is efficient in one’s
profession, income is steady, the physical demands of caring for children are over. The basal metabolic
rate starts decreasing from 30 years of age.
       Thus the energy need decreases, but the need for other nutrients (proteins, minerals and vitamins)
do not decrease.
       As for adults, food selection is made according to the Daily Food Guide (Table 14.1). The
number of servings included from various groups will be dependent on the body size and activity of the
person. In general, the reduction in energy intake can be achieved by decreasing intake of sugar,
sweets, oils and fats to ensure that the body weight is maintained at a desirable level. A sensible
programme of regular exercise, such as walking and yoga can help to maintain optimum health.
       Nutrition for Senior Citizen (60 + years)
       The rate of aging varies fronm one person to another. There are several factors which affect the
aging, which include heredity, the psycho-social and nutritional background and activity pattern. Due
to these variations, no two people age in a similar manner.
       One reassuring observation is that people, who keep physically and mentally active have been
reported to retain their sense of smell and taste even in their eighties. Those who practise weight-lifting
are able to retain their lean muscle mass and the density of their bones. If teeth are lost, well-fitting
dentures permit enjoyment of foods of varying texture. Use of hearing aid helps those with hearing
defects to maintain social contact. Lens implants after cataract surgery permit reading and free movement
thus ensuring the ability to pursue intellectual interests.
       Thus more senior citizens are found to be travelling and participating in social and community
activities than they did before the development of technologies mentioned above.
       How does one avoid potential problems?
       Healthy eating habits throughout life helps to maintain physical well-being. Regular fitness
programme of one’s choice helps to prevent physical deterioration. Enjoyable social activities help to
keep a happy frame of mind. A happy outlook, a regular practice of prayer and thankfulness are assets
which ensure a happy life at all stages including late years.
       Try to live life in a way that requires less use of medicines. If sleepy, try a short nap or meditation
instead of taking stimulants like tea or coffee. If you suffer from constipation, try taking enough
exercise with regular intake of fiber and water.
       Nutritional Requirements: Normal nutritional needs remain throughout life. Good nutrition can
speed recovery from illness and generally can improve the spirit and quality of life and even prolong
life. It is necessary to know the extent to which aging has affected a person’s physiological capabilities.
The declines in physiological functions with aging primarily of sedentary people are depicted in Figure
16.3.
       Except for energy need, due to decrease in the metabolic rate (Table 16.7), the need for all the
nutrients remains the same as before.
202                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




            Figure 16.3 The declines in physiological functions with aging in sedentary people



       Table 16.7: Variation in Energy Needs (Basal & Total) of Senior Citizen with Age

                                                 Male (60 kg)                  Female (50 kg)
                  % Reduction
      Age
                   in BMR(1)        Basal energy      Total energy     Basal energy    Total energy
      Yrs
                  After 30 yrs     Need in kcal(2)    Need in kcal    Need in kcal (2) Need in kcal
                                        (A)             (A) x1.6            (A)          (A)x 1.6

       30             100                1515             2424              1171            1874

      31–40             3                1470             2352              1136            1818

      41–50             3                1424             2279              1101            1762

      51–60           7.5                1310             2096              1013            1621

      61–70           7.5                1197             1915               925            1480

      71–80            10                1045             1672               808            1293

1. Chaney Margaret S. Nutrition, 6 edn., p.66, Houghton Mifflin Co., Boston, USA, 1960.
2. ICMR Expert Group Report, 2000, Nutrient Requirements & RDA for Indians, NIN, Hyderabad.


      The protein requirement remains at the average of 0.8 to 1.0 per kilogram. Vitamin requirements
do not change after the age of 50 except for a slight decrease in the need for thiamin, riboflavin and
niacin, which are proportional to the total energy intake (Table 16.7).
Meal Planning for Various Age Groups                                                                 203

Food and Other Habits of Senior Citizens
      Some food habits of older persons are nutritionally poor. These include excessive use of sago and
potatoes in place of a meal on particular week days such as Monday, Tuesday, Thursday, Friday or
Saturday; Ekadashi, Pradosh (biweekly) and Sankashti (monthly). Some may observe fast by taking
drinks only such as tea, coffee, lemon sherbet and buttermilk. Loneliness may reduce the intake of
proper meals. Proper meals may be substituted with snack foods such as toast, upma etc. They may
think they have eaten, when they have not, due to forgetfulness. At times they may ask for meals when
they have already eaten, annoying relatives and caretakers. They may reduce water intake to avoid
having to use the bathroom in the night. This results in constipation.
      Reduced movement to avoid falls and accidents affects circulation, digestion and muscle tone
adversely.
      If the diet intake is reduced to less than 1500kcal/day, a multi-vitamin tablet/capsule needs to be
taken to meet the recommended allowances. Intake of a variety of nutrient dense foods should be
encouraged. Intake of sufficient water is necessary to prevent constipation, to maintain urinary volume
and to prevent dehydration. Poor or missing teeth may decrease intake of vegetable and protein foods.
In such cases, blended vegetable and protein rich soups can be used.
      Any adjustment in food habits must be carefully made in consultation with the person concerned.
Food Habits and the Elderly
      Elderly persons crave for attention and are often duped into buying unnecessary food supplements
and special foods. The sales person appears to be interested in their health and persuades them to buy
expensive food supplements and special foods. Thus they spend money that could be used to buy
ordinary foods recommended in the food guide, which could provide more nutrients at less cost.
      In short, a basic plan for health promotion and disease prevention includes eating a proper diet
that focuses on a variety of foods and moderation in food intake, exercising regularly, abstaining from
smoking, limiting alcohol intake and limiting stress.

Study Questions
      1. Why is breakfast an important meal? List the foods which are included in breakfast in your
         region. What nutrients do they provide? What modification could you make to improve it.
      2. List a typical lunch/dinner menu in your home and its nutritional merits. Is there need for
         improvement? If not why not?
      3. How will you guide your younger brother/sister to choose snacks in a snack bar? Explain the
         reasons for your advice.
      4. Why is special emphasis laid on nutrition during pregnancy? Plan supplementary foods to
         meet the additional needs of pregnancy during the last trimester.
      5. Discuss other problems encountered during pregnancy. How will you help a pregnant woman
         to overcome these.
      6. Discuss the factors, which need attention to ensure successful lactation.
      7. Compare and contrast the nutritional needs of a child in first year of life with those of an
         adult.
204                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       8. List the advantages of breast-feeding.
       9. List the weaning foods used in your region. Indicate if these need modification, and the kind
          of modification needed.
      10. Discuss how parents can help children to develop good food habits.
      11. Write notes on:
          Empty calories, packed lunch.
      12. List your own meal pattern. Discuss its merits and demerits.
      13. What are the physiological functions which change with age? How does the change affect
          the nutritional intake of Senior Citizens (those abovse 60 years of age)?
                                                                                  CHAPTER 17


       Indian Meal Patterns— Vegetarian and
                                   Non-Vegetarian


     Evolution of the Vegetarian Dietary Pattern
     Vegetarian Dietary Patterns
     Non-vegetarian Dietary Patterns
     Nutritional Adequacy of Indian Diets
     Important Nutritional Aspects of Our Dietary Pattern
     Study Questions.


       AS YOU may realise our meal pattern is affected by the kinds of foods available. For example,
rice is grown in certain parts of our country and it forms the staple in those regions; similarly wheat,
jowar, bajra, makka (corn) and ragi are used as staples, where these are the major crops. Secondly, the
amounts and kinds of foods we eat is affected by the money that can be spent for food. Thirdly, our
family’s meal pattern is dictated by the geographic region, religion, community and family practices
developed over several generations.
       The dals, the vegetables and fruits, which we habitually include in our menu, are mainly those,
which were a part of our regional meal pattern. Even when we move to other regions for work or
business, we tend to retain a large part of our food heritage. For example, Punjabis residing in Bombay
or Calcutta, retain their food pattern, which includes wheat parantha, rajmah, palak, and peas, etc. A
Tamilian in similar situation would include, rice, sambar made from tur dal and vegetables such as ash
gourd and amaranth. As you know, it makes little difference whether the leafy vegetable used is amaranth
or palak from the nutritional point of view, for both provide pro-vitamin A in substantial amount. Thus
the regional patterns can meet the nutritional needs of people, if sufficient food from each of the five
groups is included; the particular food chosen from each group and the way it is prepared is a matter
of individual choice.
       In addition to these regional variations in food acceptance pattern, two major patterns are prevalent
in the world—the vegetarian and the non-vegetarian dietary. Let us examine and understand how these
affect our food choices and nutrition.
       It is good to remember that in India, vegetarians include milk and milk products such as curds,
lassi, paneer, cheese, buttermilk, etc., which are animal foods, in their diets; while the Indian non-
vegetarians may exclude fish, eggs and meat from their menu on certain days of the week, such as
206                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Mondays, Thursdays and/or Saturdays; these factors need to be taken into account while examining
these dietaries. Let us understand the historical basis of evolution of the Indian dietary before discussion
its nutritional aspects.

Evolution of the Vegetarian Dietary Pattern1
       Before the advent of Jainism, there appears to have been no restriction in the food acceptance of
our people, except on an individual voluntary basis. The philosophy of non-violence, which was preached
by the prophets of Jainism had a profound influence on the dietary practices of their followers. Jainism
can be traced back to three centuries before the advent of Buddhism, i.e., 800 BC Mahavira Vardhamana,
a Jain prophet and a contemporary of Bhagvan Gautama Buddha, was responsible for the spread of
Jainism and its concept of abstinence from flesh foods. Emperor Ashoka the Great (about 264 BC),
became an exponent of Budhhism. Not only did he become a vegetarian, but he refrained from hunting
and banned it in his kingdom. One of the reasons for abstaining from flesh foods was the belief in the
transmigration of souls between living beings, which, included animals. Thus Vegetarianism represents
a conscious choice with respect to one’s diet, which is quite different from foregoing meat because it
is expensive. Thus it does not connote a dietary practice only, but is a way of life that has cultural and
spiritual implications. Abstinence from meat, as a dietary discipline, is evident in most religious practices.
For meat is avoided by certain Christian sects during Lent; Muslims avoid pork, and Hindus avoid meat
during religious celebrations.
       Pythagoras, the Greek philosopher, who was a contemporary of Gautama Buddha, believed in the
transmigration of souls, and espoused the cause of vegetarianism. In fact, he is recognised as the
founder of vegetarianism in Europe. The ethical aspects of non-violence seem to have appealed to
some of the thinkers, such as, Sir Francis Bacon and George Bernard Shaw, and they became vegetarians.
Thus the movement to popularise vegetarianism as a desirable dietary practice, started in the Western
countries. Leonardo da Vinci, the Italian painter, Sir Issac Newton, the British physicist, John Wesley,
the founder of the Methodist Church, Helena Blavatsky, the founder of the theosophical movement,
and Mahatma Gandhi, the Indian leader, who practised non-violence, were some of the great protagonists
of vegetarianism.
       In the mid-nineteenth century, vegetarianism flourished under the leadership, of breakfast cereal
developers Kellogg, Graham and Post, as well as writers such as Uptom Sinclair. In 1978, there were
9 to 10 million Americans, who were vegetarians, according to a Roper poll. In addition, there were 40
to 50 million people, who restricted the consumption of meat in the United States of America. This
trend is observed in other Western countries also.

Vegetarian Dietary Patterns
      The traditional Indian dietary consists of cereal preparations, such as rice, chapati, roti, as the
main course, with preparations of dal, legumes, vegetables, dahi/buttermilk, as accompaniments to the
staple food.
      The word vegetarian is derived from the Latin root ‘vigitore’, meaning giving strength and health.
According to the Concise Oxford Dictionary, a vegetarian is one, who uses or advocates the use of a
diet of vegetable foods, usually with the addition of milk, eggs, to the exclusion of meat. A person, who
includes an animal food such as milk in the diet, cannot be a vegetarian, in the strict sense of the word.
 1. Mudambi, SR, and MV Rajgopal, Nutrition, 3(6), 373–78, 1987.
Indian Meal Patterns— Vegetarian and Non-Vegetarian                                                     207

Thus the word vegetarian, as used for the traditional Indian dietary, is a misnomer; and creates unnecessary
misunderstanding about its identity and nutritional quality.
      In recent years, there has been an increase is the followers of vegetarian dietary pattern in the
Western countries, as mentioned earlier. As a result; a number of variations of vegetarian dietary
pattern have emerged. These fall into the following five groups:
      (a) Lactovegetarians are those, who include milk and milk products, in addition to plant foods,
           such as cereals, dals, legumes, vegetables and fruits in their diet.
      (b) Ovolactovegetarians include eggs, milk and milk products, in addition to all the foods mentioned
           in (a) above.
      (c) Ovo-vegetarians include eggs, in addition to the plant foods.
      (d) Fruitarians include grains, nuts and fruits, i.e., the parts of plants, which are obtained
           without destruction of the plant itself.
      (e) Vegans include only plant foods in their diets, and abstain from all animal foods, even milk
           and milk products. This is comparatively a new population group, that has emerged from
           omnivores (who used to eat all plant and animal foods), in the Western countries.
      In India, traditional vegetarians belong to the first group, the lacto vegetarians. The second group
is comparatively a recent development.
      As we may realise, it is possible for vegetarians to select foods from the basic five groups and
meet their nutritional requirements.

Non-Vegetarian Dietary Patterns
      It is good to remember that there are two distinct patterns of non-vegetarian diet observed around
the world. The first is the Indian non-vegetarian pattern, which has a cereal preparation as a main
course with fish, poultry or meat dish as an accompaniment, in addition to vegetables, dal/pulse
preparation and salad. The fish or meat are served one to three times a week in the meal. The amount
of fish, poultry or meat served in such a diet is naturally smaller than when these foods are served as
the main course.
      The second non-vegetarian pattern is that which is followed in the Western countries such as
U.K., U.S.A., Canada and Europe, which has meat, fish or poultry dish as the main course, with
preparation of cereals, vegetables, fruits, as accompaniments to the main protein course. In such a
meal, the animal foods such as chicken, fish or meat roast form the main course in each meal and thus
are eaten at least twice a day. Thus the total amount of animal protein consumed is several times that
included by those, who follow the traditional Indian non-vegetarian meal pattern, though both are
designated as non-vegetarian dietaries. This aspect needs to be remembered while assessing the nutritional
adequacy of these meal patterns.

Nutritional Adequacy of Indian Diets
      It has been proved in a number of studies that dietaries made up of predominantly plant foods,
can be nutritionally adequate, if these are derived from natural foods belonging to the basic five groups,
and meet the energy needs of the individual. As we know the Sherpas (in Himalayan expeditions), who
follow a non-flesh dietary pattern, have demonstrated that their dietary is adequate to prepare them to
endure the most severe stress that can be laid on the human body-extreme altitude, almost unbearable
cold, supreme endurance and elephantine strength.
208                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Like any other diet, the adequacy of the vegetarian diet depends on the individual food selection.
In reviewing typical menus from various countries around the world, nutritionists found that a diet,
which supplies 2500 calories, would contain 50 per cent more protein than needed by 98 per cent of the
population. It is difficult to find a mixed vegetarian diet that will produce a negative nitrogen balance,
unlesss a large part of it consists of sugar, jams, jellies and other essentially non-protein foods.
       The myths about magical qualities of proteins, especially animal proteins, have been perpetuated
for generations. It is important to take stock of the hard facts about overconsumption of proteins,
especially in the form of animal foods.
       Apart from the waste of money by overconsumption of animal proteins, the disposal of its
metabolic waste products may overburden the kidneys and tax the body’s circulatory functions, due to
the high fat and cholesterol intake. Last but not the least, the obesity, observed in the population, due to
the high energy intake associated with such a diet, is a predisposing factor in a number of diseases
prevalent in the developed world. The major dietary risk to health in the U.S.A. and Europe comes from
eating too much food and the wrong kind of food.
       The dietary goals for the U.S.A. and U.K. have emphasised the need to reduce the animal foods,
saturated fats and sugar in the diet, and increase the intake of whole grain unrefined cereals, vegetables
and fruits in the diet. There are several advantages in such a shift in diet. Plant foods are high in
complex carbohydrates, which according to the U.S. dietary goals, need to be increased to account for
55–60 per cent of the total energy intake. Animal foods such as meat, fish and eggs do not contain any
carbohydrates. In addition, plant foods are good sources of fibre, which is needed for the maintenance
of muscle tone. Most plant foods are low in calories, as they contain a low percentage of fat.
       The nutritional needs of Indians are met, when they follow the traditional vegetarian or non-
vegetarian dietary pattern. Please note that the staples in both Indian dietary patterns are cereals. The
fish, meat or poultry are served as only a side dish in the Indian menu, while in the Western menu it is
served as the main course. Therefore, those, who follow the traditional Indian non-vegetarian pattern,
are likely to have very few health problems, resulting from excessive consumption of animal protein
foods, such as degenerative diseases of heart, kidney and colon.
       Several studies have been carried out to assess the efficacy of predominantly vegetarian diets for
athletes and other sports persons and how these diets affect their performance. On the basis of these,
a strict vegetarian diet is advocated for athletes and other sports—persons, for optimal endurance and
athletic skills. It is reported that a high carbohydrate and low protein diet increases the stamina of
bicycling athletes by 300 per cent, while skiiers fed high carbohydrate diet, were able to work about
three times as long as on a very high fat diet. Thus the vegetarian diet is not only adequate to maintain
good health, but is also appropriate for athletes, be they runners, bicyclists or cross-country skiiers.

Important Nutritional Aspects of our Dietary Pattern
       There are several desirable practices in our meal pattern. It is important to understand the nutritional
significance of these and ensure their retention. For example, we grind whole wheat and use the flour
to prepare chapaties, phulkas, or puri. Thus we get all the minerals and vitamins present in the outer
layers of the grain. If we substitute bread or other products made from maida (refind wheat flour), in
our dietary in place of chapati, made from whole wheat flour, we would be deprived of iron, thiamin
and niacin, present in the whole wheat flour. For example, bread, which is made from maida, contains
a fifth of the vitamin thiamin, found in whole wheat flour. Therefore use of bread in place of chapati is
Indian Meal Patterns— Vegetarian and Non-Vegetarian                                                     209

not a desirable change from nutritional point of view. Similarly, we make roti or bhakari of flour made
from whole jowar, bajra, makka or ragi, which is a good practice and must be retained.
       In some parts of India, parboiled rice is used, which is an excellent practice, as it is richer in
minerals and vitamins than raw milled rice. It is important to retain and cultivate the use of parboiled
rice.
       In our traditional diet, a number of fermented foods are made, which not only add variety, but
also important nutrients to our menu. For example, fermented foods, like idli, dhokla, curds, buttermilk
and lassi, have higher amount of B-vitamins than the unfermented rice, dal and milk from which these
are made. A word of caution, please remember that most of the instant mixes you buy for convenience,
rely on chemical additives to leaven the product and therefore lack the nutritional improvement we get
during fermentation in these foods, when these are made by the traditional process.
       Another desirable practice is the use of germinated pulses in our traditional dietary. As you may
know, during the germination of food, vitamin C is synthesised, thus improving the nutritional content
of the food. Another practical benefit of germinated foods is that they need less time to cook and are
easy to digest. In some regions, germinated pulse preparations are made for special occasions and
shared. For example, in Maharashtra, germinated pulse usal is made and distributed to people on the
fifth day after a baby is born; in Mysore and Tamil Nadu, shundal, made from germinated chana, is
given to ladies and children, during Navaratri as a benediction. During Chaitra Gauri haldi-kumkum,
germinated bengal-gram is given as a gift to ladies and girls in Maharashtra. These practices emphasise
the use of germinated foods and must be retained to ensure good nutrition.
       If you observe the traditional menus for everyday meals as also for feasts, you will notice that
leafy vegetables form an important part of it. For example, sarson-ka-sag (mustard greens) in Punjab,
aluchee bhaji (colocaisa leaves) in Maharashtra and keere sambar (leafy vegetable soup) in Tamil Nadu
are examples of use of leafy vegetables in daily meals. Besides this, a traditional manu for weddings in
Maharashtra is not complete without a preparation of leafy vegetables, bengal gram dal and groundnuts.
If we stop and examine our regional menus, we will find many examples of use of leafy vegetables in
the menu. Retaining this rich food heritage will not only add to our eating pleasure, but also ensure good
nutrition.
       In our regional menus we include a variety of salads, which we call koshimbir, raita or bharta. So
use of a variety of salads also forms an important part of our traditional food pattern. We use curd,
lemon juice, mango scraping, roasted groundnuts, soaked dals (such as chana and mung), coriander
leaves, mint leaves, etc., as salad dressings, which add variety of flavours and improve the nutritive
value of the product. It is perhaps not out of place to mention, that these salad dressing are not fatty like
the French dressing or mayonnaise, which some of you may be tempted to use in their place in order
to mimic the Western pattern.
       Traditionally fruits form a very important part of our tropical food heritage, for we have some
fruits in season all through the year. So you find that we use fruits as offerings in temple, and receive
these as prasad (benediction). We give seasonal fruits as a gift to guests, especially ladies and children.
Fruits are also the gift of choice, to be taken to sick relatives and friends, when we visit them in hospital
or at home. As you have learnt the nutritional contribution of fruits in the dietary, you can appreciate the
wisdom of retaining these traditional practices.
210                                                Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Study Questions
      1. Trace the evolution of the vegetarian dietary pattern with particular reference to India.
      2. List the various foods in a typical Indian vegetarian meal of your region. Explain how you
         would check whether it is nutritionally adequate.
      3. What is the difference between the typical Indian and Western non-vegetarian diet?
      4. List some of the desirable and undesirable practices in the meal pattern of your region.
PART - IV
  Foods
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                                                                                CHAPTER 18


      Food Selection, Purchase and Storage


     Food Slection and Purchase
        Non-perishable Foods
           General Criteria Selection
           Cereals—Wheat, Rice and Millets
           Dals and Pulses
           Sugar and Jaggery
        Semi-perishable Foods
           Processed Cereals and Pulse Products
           Roots and Tubers
           Fats and Oils
        Perishable Foods
           Vegetables and Fruits
           Milk and Milk Products
           Eggs, Poultry, Fish and Meat
     Storage of Food
         Storage of Non-perishable Foods
         Storage of Semi-perishable Foods
         Storage of Perishable Foods
     Study Questions and Activities


     FOOD SELECTION is the first step in ensuring good nutrition for the family. The daily food
guide helps in deciding the kinds and amount of foods to be purchased.

Food Selection and Purchase
       Selection of foods, from the available variety, is an important aspect of marketing. Intelligent
selection of foods from the basic five groups is based on the knowledge of attributes of high quality
foods.
       How often we purchase food depends on its storage life. Foods are classified, on the basis of
their stability during storage, into non-perishable, semi-perishable and perishable foods. Let us consider
the criteria used for selection of various foods prior to purchase.
214                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Non-perishable Foods
       Non-perishable foods include whole grain cereals, whole and split pulses, nuts and oilseeds,
sugar and jaggery.
       Cereals and dals supply about 330 to 350 k calories per 100 g. There is a distinct difference in the
amount of protein supplied by these, the cereals supply only 7 to 12 per cent protein, while the dals and
whole pulses supply twice as much protein, viz., 17 to 25 per cent.
       The criteria for selection of all these with the exception of sugar and jaggery are similar.
       General Criteria of Selection: Whole grain cereals, dals and whole pulses (mung, chawli, math,
rajmah, etc.) are selected on the basis of their appearance, feel, colour and variety. The grains are
inspected for uniform size, cleanliness, soundness of grain, absence of broken pieces, freedom from
insect infestation, absence of admixture with foreign seeds and trash, dirt, mud, stones and sand.
       The grain can be chewed to detect the texture and flavour. Hollow, soft fibrous texture indicates
deterioration in quality. Sour or rancid flavour and odour indicate spoilage during storage. Nuts and
oilseeds must be free from any absorbed or rancid odour and flavour.
       Cereals: Cereals, millets and their products are the staple foods in the Indian dietary. It is important
that these be selected carefully as they supply a major part of our energy, protein, iron and thiamin
needs.
       Grain quality has two aspects. The first is physical quality, which refers to cleanliness, soundness
of grain and freedom from foreign matter. The second is processing quality, which means suitability
for use. For example, thin long grain rice, which does not clump after cooking, is considered suitable
for making pulao, a particular type of wheat is required to prepare puran poli, etc. Let us consider the
specific criteria for selection of these foods.
       Wheat is selected on the basis of the quality aspects mentioned above. Whole wheat is ground for
individual use by the families. Whole wheat flour is mainly used to prepare unleavened bread (chapati,
roti, parantha, etc.) in India. In these preparations very little nutrient loss occurs. Normally consumers
buy the variety that suits their needs in terms of performance. Not much information is available about
the performance of various varieties in indigenous wheat preparations. Therefore, selection is based on
the consumer’s personal knowledge and experience.
       Rice is available as milled, hand-pounded and parboiled varieties. The degree of milling and polishing
affects the nutrient content. The parboiled rice and hand-pounded rice contain significant amounts of
thiamin; highly polished milled rice has very little thiamin.
       A number of grain types such as long, medium and short, are available. The selection is made
depending on the intended use and price. For example, thin, long varieties are preferred for table use,
medium and short varieties are used for preparations of rice made after grinding.
       Indians prefer the individual grains of rice to retain their identify after cooking. Ageing appears to
help develop this characteristic in the grain. It is observed that old grains absorb more than two times
their volume of water during cooking, while new rice absorbs only two times their volume. It is
difficult to judge the extent to which rice has aged, by its appearance, as no visual criteria of agening
have been established, to guide the consumer.
       Millets: Other grains include bajra, jowar, ragi, maize and other millets, which are used as a
staple. The criteria for selection are the same as for all grains—soundness of grain, cleanliness, freedom
from admixture with other grains and trash.
       Most of these millets are ground and the whole grain flour is used to prepare unleavened bread
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                    215

(roti). As whole grain flour is used in most preparations, very little loss of nutrients occurs. It must be
noted that ragi is an exceptionally good source of calcium, and ragi and bajra of iron.
       Dals and Pulses: Tur, mung, chana, lentil and urad, are the most used varieties. These are selected
according to the general criteria of selection indicated above. Freedom from moisture, during storage,
is very important to avoid spoilage. The dals, which contain broken pieces, cost less than those, which
do not. These less expensive ones can be used in preparations, which are made after grinding (wet or
dry) such as vadas, idli, dhokla, pakodas etc.
       Sugar is made from sugarcane in India. It is normally available in three main forms—granulated,
powdered sugar and large crystals (khadi sakhar). Granulated sugar is the most commonly used sugar.
Selection is made on the basis of cleanliness and absence of dirt and dust. Jaggery is also made from
sugarcane in India. There are two main types. One is solid, light golden in colour, and the other is soft
and dark in colour. Jaggery is selected for colour and consistency needed in terms of intended use.
Dark variety is preferred for preparations such as chikki, while light coloured variety may be used in
payasam (milk pudding or kheer).
Semi-perishable Foods
      These include processed cereals and pulse products, roots and tubers, fats and oils.

Processed Cereals and Pulse Products
      A number of processed products are made from cereals and pulses. These include wheat products,
such as, cracked wheat, semolina (rawa), atta, maida, rice flakes, puffed rice (murmura), roasted
chana dal (dale), chana, etc. These are made by grinding the grain to varying degrees of fineness
(various particle sizes), by roasting the whole grain or by any other method. These processes increase
the surface area of the product exposed to atmosphere, decrease the preparation time and also reduce
the shelf-life of the products. While the whole grains have a shelf-life of a year or more, the shelf-life
of these processed products may vary from two weeks to a few months.
      Broken Wheat or Dalia is whole wheat coarsely ground into large particles. As the losses during
milling are very little, it is a very nutritious food. Good quality is indicated by sweet taste and an
absence of sour, mouldy odour and flavour. It spoils very quickly in storage, due to insect infestation.
It can be cooked as such, made into upma, shira or porridge.
      Semolina, Suji or Rawa is available in varied sizes. The fine grain varieties are used for preparation
of halwas, while the large grain varieties are suitable for preparation of upma, shira, etc. These are
selected on the basis of uniformity of size, freedom from oxidised or mouldy odour, grit or bran.
      Maida is white finely extracted wheat flour. It is free from bran and has a lower content of
protein, iron and B-vitamins. It has a lower shelf-life than semolina, as the large surface area permits
faster rate of spoilage. Good quality maida is free from insect infestation, bad odours and lump formation.

Processed Rice Products
      These include rice flakes and rice puffs. Rice flakes are made after soaking the paddy in hot
water; parehing it by roasting and then flattening it by force while it is hot to form flakes. It retains a
large part of the iron and B-vitamin of the aleurone layer. The roasting helps to toast the grain, resulting
in partial cooking of the grain. It needs very little time to prepare and is used as a snack. It should be
free from bran, broken particles, fragments of the seed coat, insects, stones, trash and bad odour.
216                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     Rice Puffs are another ready-to-eat rice product. It is selected for crispness, freedom from
stones, seedcoats, sand and dirt.
     Roasted chana dal and chanas are selected for crisp texture, sweet flavour and absence of flat
flavour.

Roots and Tubers
      These include potatoes, sweet potatoes, onions, tapioca (cassava), colocasia (aravi), yams and
many lesser known varieties of roots and tubers. In general, these should be firm, heavy, free from
bruises, spots, dirt and discolouration.
      Potatoes are chosen according to the recipe to be made. These should be free from sprouts,
heavy in relation to size, firm, with shallow eyes and without green discolouration. The varieties, which
hold their form during cooking, are preferred in most preparations.
      Onions—Select hard, well-shaped globes, with dry skins, free from spots and bruises.

Fats and Oils
       A number of household fats are available in India. The choice depends on the food preparation in
which the fat is to be used, the family needs, the food budget and regional preference.
       Ghee is preferred for its delicate flavour, in preparation of sweets (halwas especially) and to serve
with rice or snacks. Butter is used as a spread and in some baked products for the same reason.
       Oil is normally used for seasoning vegetables, dals and as a frying medium. The choice of oil
varies from one region to another, e.g., mustard oil is used in Bengal, coconut oil in Kerala, groundnut
oil in Gujarat and gingelly (til) oil in Tamil Nadu.
       A large amount of oil is marketed as unrefined or crude oil. Criteria for selection of crude oil are
presence of the natural characteristic aroma, natural colour, clarity, freedom from admixture with
other kinds of oils, freedom from solid particles and flat or rancid odour.
       All the oils and fats supply energy irrespective of their source. Most of the vegetable oils supply
poly unsaturated fatty acids (Table 18.1). The animals fats, ghee and butter, supply some vitamin A
also. Some refined oils are fortified with vitamin A almost to the same level a cow’s ghee (750 mcg or
2500 I.U. per 100 g). Refined oils have a longer shelf-line than unrefined oils of the same kind. As
impurities are removed in refining, the smoke points1 of refined oils during frying is higher than that of
unrefined oils. Refined oils are used in bakery products (bread, biscuits, etc.) by large bakeries.
       Hydrogenated fats (vanaspati) are also available for use in food preparation. These are manufactured
from vegetable oils by the addition of molecular hydrogen to the double bonds in the unsaturated fatty
acids in the presence of a catalyst. These are partially hydrogenated to obtain the physical characeristics
desired in terms of texture and boiling point.
       The product thus formed is more stable than the vegetable oil from which it is made. The process
is designed to produce characteristics most desired in terms of use and consumer acceptance. In India,
it is made as a substitute for ghee, and therefore its physical appearance and texture resembles ghee. It
is also fortified with vitamin A to the same level as ghee (750 mcg or 2500 I.U. per 1001g) to protect
the consumer. Hydrogenated fats have a higher smoke point than refined oils, and are used for frying
bland foods. These are also used in pastries.

1. Smoke point is the temperature at which a fat or oil gives off a thin bluish smoke when heated.
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                 217

      Oils and fats are selected for colour, clarity, characteristic aroma and absence of bad odour
(rancid), dirt, dust particles, etc., in the product.
                 Table 18.1: Polyunsaturated Fatty Acids (PUFA) in Oils & Fats1

                 Oil or Fat                                            PUFA Content %
                 Kardi oil (Safflower)                                        75
                 Soyabean oil                                                 55
                 Cotton seed oil                                              50
                 Maize (Corn) oil                                             45
                 Til (Sesame or gingelly) oil                                 42
                 Groundnut oil                                                28
                 Mustard oil                                                  25
                 Olive oil                                                    10
                 Coconut oil                                                   2
                 Vanaspati                                                     6
                 Ghee (butterfat)                                              4

          1. Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, p.149. ICMR; 197p.


Perishable Foods
      Perishable foods include plant foods like fresh vegetables and fruits, and animals foods, such as
milk, eggs, poultry, fish and meat.
      Vegetables and fruits are good sources of vitamins, minerals and dietary fibre. Milk, eggs, flesh
foods are good sources of proteins and B-vitamins. These foods are easily spoilt, if stored at room
temperature, due to the action of enzymes and microorganisms.
      One criterion for selection of perishable foods is that these must be fresh. In practice this means
milk freshly drawn, fish freshly caught from a river or sea, meat soon after slaughter, eggs just laid,
vegetables just harvested from the garden and fruits just picked from the tree.
      As population increases, foods have to be purchased further away from the point of production.
Knowledge of quality characteristics of foods may help you to select and purchase perishable foods.
Vegetables and Fruits
      Vegetables and fruits make a meal attractive and enjoyable by the variety of colours, textures and
flavours they contribute. Vegetables and fruits are the major source of β − carotene and vitamin C in
the diet. In addition they supply varying amounts of minerals and other vitamins also.
      Most fresh vegetables and fruits retain their freshness for a short time under ideal conditions of
storage. Standards for selection of vegetables vary with the specific commodity. In general, freshness,
uniformity of size, variety, colour, degree of ripeness and freedom from defects are the qualities most
frequently sought. When purchasing, select fresh vegetables and fruits, which are firm, crisp, bright in
colour, with no visible bruises or signs of decay and wilting.
218                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      At the peak of season, each vegetable and fruit has the highest nutrient content, flavour and is
available at a reasonable price. It is therefore advisable to buy vegetables and fruits which are in season,
as the quality is high and the price low.
      Leafy Vegetables include all sags or keerai such as amaranth, bathua, coriander, fenugreek (methi),
spinach (palak) colocasia leaves, mint and mustard. Dark green, leafy vegetables are good sources of
minerals, iron and calcium, and vitamin A, C and some of the B-complex vitamins.
      Select clean leafy vegetables, which are tender, crisp, brightly coloured and free from flowers,
insects, mud and spots or holes in the leaves. In head vegetables, such as cabbage, the hard, heavy and
compact heads free from bruises and worm injury are a good buy.
      Other Vegetables include stems, fruit vegetables such as brinjals, cucumber, all gourds, pumpkin,
ladies finger, pepper, tomatoes, pods such as cluster beans, french beans, immature seeds-corn, wal,
chawali and peas, cauliflower and all other vegetables, which are not included in the groups leafy or
roots and tubers.
      Generally tender, firm, crisp, bright coloured vegetables free from worm injury, are selected and
too mature, dry, wilted, shrunken, shrivelled discoloured vegetables are rejected. Small or medium-
sized vegetables are likely to be more tender and less fibrous in texture than large and too mature ones.
Each vegetables is selected according to the preparation in which it is to be used. For example, tomatoes
used for salads need to be large and fleshy; small and medium-sized ones can be used in mixed vegetables
or stews.
Fruits
       Many fruits are used as vegetables, e.g., cucumber, tomatoes, etc. What we eat as fruit is normally
seedbearing parts of plants, which consist of edible tissue, which is juicy, pulpy and sweet or sweet-
sour in taste and mature seed or seeds enclosed in it. Most ripe fruits can be eaten as such. Fruits have
delicate, delectable flavours and aroma and attractive colour and texture. Most fruits are enjoyed by all
groups and at all times either as an appetiser, a snack or as a dessert. Fruits are important sources of
minerals and vitamins. Deep orange-yellow varieties are important as sources of pro-vitamin A (beta-
carotene). Amla, guavas, citrus fruits, pineapple, are rich sources of vitamin C. In purchasing fruits, it
is necessary to learn to judge the appropriate size and colour for the kind and variety of fruit, as these
are indicators of the high quality of the fruit and its maturity. As with vegetables, fresh fruits are best
at the peak of the season, as the flavour and nutrient content is high and prices competitive.
       Citrus Fruits: Select mature, firm, just ripe, thin skinned, heavy in relation to size fruit, which is
free from blemishes, bruises, soft spots. Citrus fruits include oranges, sweet limes (mausambi), grape
fruits, pomoloe, lemons, etc. These are sorted according to size and the price decreases with the size.
These are sold per dozen or per basket, which contain two to six dozen of larger fruits and hundred of
smaller fruits. In some markets lemons are sold by weight. Citrus fruits which are thin skinned, firm,
and heavy in relation to size are preferred, as these are likely to contain more juice. Cirtus fruits are
valued for their taste and refreshing flavour and add to the appetising quality of fruit salads and fruit
cocktails.
       Bananas: A number of varieties—green, yellow and red are normally available throughout the
year. Each one has its own characteristic flavour. Of these green ones are more common than the other
two. The bunch is plucked when it starts ripening on the tree. It is better to purchase bananas which
are free from bruises and slightly hard and then allow them to ripen at room temperature, as fully ripe
fruit is easily bruised even as you carry it home from the market. Shelf-life of green bananas is very
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                     219

short after ripening. Ripe fruit does not store well in the refrigerator, as the sugar to starch conversion
is favoured at low temperature.
      Some varieties of yellow bananas (such as velachi) can be stored for two to three days after
ripening and are not easily bruised, and are a good buy, when available.
      Apples are now available throughout the year, as these are now held in cold storage. Good apples
are firm, crisp, well coloured and heavy. Each variety has its own characteristic colour and shape.
Apples become mealy, have less flavour and taste, when stored too long. Hence, it is advisable to buy
apples only in season. The red and golden apples are suitable for serving as such, while small, tart fruits
are suitable for making jelly, sauce and pies. Grapes should be plump, shiny, well coloured, firmly
attached to stem, free from discolouration and bruises.
      Remember not to, refrigerate bananas, pineapples, papayas and avocadoes, as these fruits undergo
undesirable changes in texture and flavour at refrigerator temperature. Most other fruits keep well,
when refrigerated.
Milk and Milk Products
      Milk: Fresh milk has a slightly sweetish odour and flavour, is white in colour and has a faintly
acid reaction to litmus. Stale milk has a sour odour and flavour. Fresh cow’s and buffalo’s milk is sold
through home delivery or dairies. It is advisable to boil fresh milk before use.
      Pasteurised Milk: In the larger cities, pasteurised milk is distributed by government, semi-
government, co-operative or private agencies. The milk is pasteurised, bottled or put into plastic packets
and sold. The price of the milk is indirectly related to the amount of fat present. Major part of the
pasteurised, milk sold through Government channels is defatted to varying degrees. As the fat separated
is sold after conversion to butter, it helps to reduce the price of the milk.
      Butter: Butter is made from milk cream. It contains 11 to 16 per cent moisture. It has a delicate
flavour and has a short shelf-life at room temperature. Processed butter keeps up to two weeks in the
refrigerator. Home-made fresh butter contains more moisture and therefore has a shorter shelf-life than
processed butter.
      Paneer: Paneer is coagulated milk protein with high moisture content. It should be used immediately
after purchase. It should be bought from clean hygienic dairies or made at home.
      Khoya or Mava is prepared from milk by evaporation of water. Fresh khoya has a sweet delicate
aroma and taste. Stale khoya has a rancid odour and a flat taste.
Eggs, Poultry, Fish and Meat
       Eggs: A fresh egg has a small aircell, which can be observed against a light or a candle. Eggs are
sorted according to size. Large eggs are preferred for table use. When eggs are used in preparation,
size is not important and selection is made in terms of price in relation to size. It is advisable to purchase
fresh, clean and unbroken eggs.
       Poultry: In poultry, there is a relatively high proportion of waste from live weight to edible
portion. Edible portion is only about 55 per cent of live weight. Selection is made on the basis of
intended use of the poultry. Good quality poultry is full fleshed, meaty and has a good layer of fat. The
skin is smooth, without tears and discolouration or pin feathers. Poultry which is dressed, should be
properly refrigerated.
       In a young bird, the skin and breast-bone are pliable, soft and tear easily. Older birds have hard
calcified breast-bone and may have a lot of long hair. Weight is not necessarily related to the age of the
220                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

bird. In young birds sex difference is not significant, but older male birds are less fatty and are inferior
in flavour to female birds.
       Fish: Fresh fish has firm flesh, a stiff body and tight scales. If you press the body, no indentation
is left. If placed in water, fresh fish sinks; stale fish is flabby; has sunken and dull eyes, scales are easily
brushed off, gills are not bright red and has a state or sour odour. Select fresh fish, which have red gills
and bright eyes. Be sure to purchase fish, which has been refrigerated or stored on ice, and is not
slippery or slimy to touch.
       Select fish according to intended use, e.g., whole fish or fillet for baking; steaks for boiling or
frying. Frozen fish should be frozen solid when purchased, and should have no odour. It should be
wrapped in water proof packaging material. It should be kept frozen until use.
       Meat: Meat is selected on the basis of conformation or form, finish and quality.
       Conformation or form refers to the shape or build of the animal. Good form consists of short,
thick, compact build, with large muscles, which have high proportion of meat to bone. Finish indicates
the amount and distribution of fat. An even larger of fat on the outside of the carcass and even
distribution of fat in the lean part are indicators of a good finish. In good quality meat (i) lean meat is
bright red in colour, when cut surface is exposed to air; (ii) it is fine grained and smooth to touch,
(iii) the fat is firm, brittle and creamy white in colour.
       Dark colour, coarse grain, low fat content uneven distribution and yellow-orange colour of fat
and soft texture are indicators of poor quality meat. In India lamb and mutton are used widely. Lamb is
sheep’s flesh up to the age of one year. When the sheep is more than one year old, its flesh is called
mutton.
       Pork is flesh of pig. The best quality of pork has muscle that is grayish white to pink in young and
deep rose in older animals. The flesh is firm and fine grained and the bones are soft and red. It has a
minimum of fat. Lower quality pork is heavier and contains more fat. Pork could contain a parasitic
roundworm of microscopic size which produces a disease called trichinosis. It is, therefore, rec-
ommended that pork be always well cooked before being eaten, as cooking at high temperatures
destroys this organism.
       Meat prices vary according to the cut, quality and kind. Selection is made according to the
intended use in preparation. Generally, the amount of meat purchased is 60 g uncooked boneless meat
per person and 100 g, if it contains bones. The meat should be bought from a clean and hygienic shop
and should be free from bad odour. Meat should be refrigerated after slaughter, until it is sold. Slime on
the surface of meat indicates deterioration.

Storage of Food
      Proper storage of food, that is produced at home or purchased for the family is an important part
of meeting the food needs of the family. It is necessary to decide about what to store and how to store
after considering the space available and the shelf-life of the foods.
      On the basis of their stability during storage, foods have been divided into non-perishable, semi-
perishable and perishable foods. Table 18.2 gives a list of common foods classified according to their
stability during storage at room temperature. It may be noted that cereals, dals, legumes, which have
been dried to less than 13 per cent moisture are non-perishable if stored in a cool, dry place.
      The foods, which can be stored for a week to a couple of months, at room temperature without
the occurrence of undesirable changes in flavour and texture can be termed as semi-perishable foods.
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                     221

These include, baked foods, roasted, popped or toasted cereals and legumes, ground flours and some
fruits and vegetables. Most of the fresh fruits and vegetables, milk, meat, fish, poultry are perishable
foods. Their storage life varies from a few hours to a few days, depending on their composition and
temperature and humidity at which these are stored.
       Usually cereals (e.g., wheat, rice), millets (bajra), corn (makka), jowar legumes, nuts, oilseeds,
oil, sugar, salt, etc., are some of the foods, which can be bought in bulk and stored. The quantities
stored by a family depends on size of the family and the space available for storage. It also depends on
the marketing facilities available and the monetary and other resources of the family.
       In rural areas, people store a year’s supply of cereals, dals, ground-nuts, jaggery, sugar, spices,
salt, tamarind, etc. There are several reasons for this practice. The best material is available in harvest
season at a reasonable rate. After the season, the rate fluctuates considerably. Many articles are out of
stock after the harvest season, or, if available, the quality is poor.
       In large cities the trend is quite different. The storage space may be limited. Salaried persons find
it easier to buy on a monthly or fortnightly basis. The marketing facilities are relatively stable and
storing enough groceries for a fortnight or a month is adequate.
                                 Table 18.2: Storage Life of Foods at 25°C

Food      Non-perishable                  Semi-perishable                 Perishable
Group
   I      Dals, split, legumes,           Flours of dals, roasted         Cooked dals and legumes,
          whole, nuts and oilseeds,       dals, roasted nuts and          wet-ground mixes (e.g., idli mix)
          dry salted fish and meat        oil-seeds, eggs                 milk, fresh dahi, butter-milk,
                                                                          khoya,
                                                                          cheese, meat, poultry, fish
 II (a)   Nil                             Nil                             All foods in this group
 II (b)   Pickled mango, pickled          Citrus fruits–oranges           Amla, guava cashew
          lemons and other citrus         lemons, sweet limes,            apple, pineapple, tomato
          fruits                          grape fruits
  III     Nil                             Apples, apricots,               Peas, beans, brinjals,
                                          pumpkin, ashgourd roots         carrots
                                          and tubers, yams,
                                          potatoes, onions
  IV      Whole cereals and millets,      Biscuits, cakes, rawa           Bread, roti, chapati rice or
          dry cereal products             (suji), cereal flours, rice     other cooked cereals
                                          flakes, popped cereals
   V      Sugar, Jaggery,                 Mithais                         Butter, cream
          hydrogenated fat,
          vanaspati, oil, ghee


Storage of Non-perishable Foods
     Dals, whole legumes, most of the whole pulses, oilseeds, etc., can be cleaned to remove stones,
sand and any other foreign matter and washed with water to remove any dust and dirt adhering to the
222                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


grains. Then these may be dried in the sun. After drying, the food materials should be allowed to cool,
before being put in containers for storage.
       Usually dry foods are stored in tins, which have tight-fitting lids. Spices and murrabbas are
stored in battles and pickles in glass, earthenware or porcelain containers.
       Whatever the material of the container, it is important to wash it with hot water and soap and any
matter adhering to it should be scrubbed with a brush or coconut fibre. Next it should be allowed to
dry, preferably in the sun. If any wiping is necessary, it should be done with a clean cloth.
       Convenient Arrangements: Some houses have a separate storeroom. Some have a closet like
space attached to the kitchen for storage. Some build a large storage cupboard in the kitchen itself.
       Some storerooms are fitted with wall cupboards and these are convenient for storage. Others
have cement shelves. If neither arrangement is in existence, wooden shelves can be made, which work
well for storage.
       To facilitate cleaning of the floor, it is better to have the lowest shelf about six to eight inches
above the floor. The heaviest containers should be placed on the lowest shelf. Wherever two rows are
placed, taller containers should be kept at the back and the smaller ones in front, so that it is easy to
reach both.
       Using clean ladles to remove the food from the large containers helps in getting a known amount
and avoids spilling.
       It is good to keep a few blank cards in the storeroom and note the amounts bought and used with
dates. This helps to get an accurate idea of the amounts used. It also gives a fair idea of overall nutrition
of the family. An idea of the actual usage of articles helps in making a realistic budget. One added
benefit is that any pilferage of food is quickly noticed.
       In many city houses, there is no separate storeroom. So it is necessary to fit up storage shelves
in the kitchen. In this situation, it is important to put the shelves as far away from the cooking area as
possible, because cooking results in heating up the air around the stove (or any other cooking device—
gas or sigree). This frequent increase in temperature encourages the growth of moths and weevils in
the food. Also, when air is heated, the moisture from the air is condensed, making nearby objects
damp. This, too, aids the growth of moths and weevils. Therefore, the storage shelves should be
located in a cool and dry corner of the kitchen.
       In most rural households, cereals are stored in earthenware containers or containers made of
bamboo and plastered with mud or cow-dung. These are improvised storage structures made from
indigenous materials. Cereals after harvest and drying are stored in these containers and covered with
dried-hay or straws. These storage structures are however susceptible to attack by rodents and
consequently some losses of stored foodgrains occur. Pulses, spices, tamarind, etc., are also usually
stored in earthenware pots or jugs.
       For bulk-storage of foodgrains usually maintained by wholesale traders. State Trading Corporations,
Central Warehouses, Food Corporation of India, the foodgrains are stored in gunny-bags (jute bags) in
piles in big godowns usually made rat-proof. These godowns are to be properly ventilated, periodically
fumigated and kept free from water-logging to prevent dampening of stored commodities.
Storage of Semi-perishable Foods
      When cereals, dals and legumes (including groundnuts) are subject to any processing such as
grinding, roasting, baking or frying, their high quality storage life is reduced depending upon the storage
temperature and relative humidity (presence of moisture in the air).
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                     223

      The flours, suji, rice flakes (chewda), roasted dals, etc., which have a moisture content less than
13 per cent are stored in the same manner as cereals and pulses described above. Flour and Semolina
(suji) spoil faster than whole grain, because the insects can use these foods more easily. When rice
flakes or popcorn is made some flavour compounds are formed, which are responsible for the
characteristic flavour. These are slowly lost during storage, thus these products become less palatable,
as the period of storage increases. It is therefore better to use such products within a few weeks of
production to ensure high quality.
      Apples, citrus fruits, some gourds and root vegetables keep well in a cool storeroom, cellar or
basement. Suitable temperature for storage of these fruits and vegetables is around 15°C. Table 18.3
gives optimal temperatures and relative humidity for storage of raw foods.
      Table 18.3: Optimal Temperature and Relative Humidity for Storage of Raw Foods

              Product (foods)                     Temperature                Relative Humidity
                                                     (°C)                            %
              Bananas                                12–16                          85–90
              Beans, peppers                            7                           85–90
              Cabbage, lettuce, carrots                 0                           90–95
              Lemons                                 13–14                          85–90
              Melons                                  4–10                          80–85
              Nuts                                    0–02                          65–70
              Onions                                    0                           70–75

              Tomatoes (ripe)                         4–10                          85–90


Storage of Perishable Foods
       Foods spoil due to the action of enzymes and microorganisms (moulds, yeasts and bacteria) in
them. Actual spoilage is usually quite easily noticed by the presence of rancid odour flavour of fats
(caused by oxidation), fermented odour of fruit or fruit juices due to yeast growth, or the appearance
of mould growth on bread, roti or cooked rice. Slime on the surface of meats, or sour taste in bland
foods may be caused by bacterial action.
       Low temperatures retard spoilage and other changes in the quality of perishable foods
(Figure 18.1). The action of enzymes and the growth of spoilage organisms is slowed down by low
temperature storage. Perishable foods include most of the fresh vegetables and fruits and animal protein
foods such as milk, eggs, meat, fish and poultry.
       Vegetables and Fruits continue to respire after they are harvested. Harvesting disturbs the normal
life processes, and vegetables start losing their vitality, turgidity and food value. The harvested vegetables
continue to respire during transport and storage. This involves the using of oxygen, the metabolism of
cell food materials, and the release of carbon dioxide, water and energy. Most of the energy is released
in the form of heat. The process of respiration must be slowed during storage, by control of temperature
and relative humidity.
224                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




              Figure 18.1: Refrigeration—a low temperature storage of perishable foods.

      Plant (vegetable) tissues change during storage. These changes include loss of water, modification
of the fibres, and change in the pectins. The loss of water is reduced by storing vegetables in an
atmosphere of high relative humidity. Removing the tops of radishes, carrots and onions, reduces loss
of moisture, due to decrease in surface area. Peas in pods keep better than when shelled. Peas and corn
become less palatable during storage due to sugar being converted to starch. It is better to buy these
vegetables only in the quantity needed for immediate use. Succulent vegetables should be kept cold in
a dampened cloth or in a covered ventilated container. Roots and tubers may be stored in a cool,
ventilated place the storage temperature being maintained between 3 and 10°C (38–50°F) — to keep
sprouting to a minimum. Only sound vegetables should be selected and stored; even a few bruised
tubers may contaminate the entire lot.
Food Selection, Purchase and Storage                                                                  225

       Leafy and other vegetables and fruits start ageing soon after harvest. The crispness and flavour
of green leafy vegetables deteriorate as water evaporates from it. These changes related to ageing are
retarded by low temperature storage.
       Leafy and other vegetables tend to shrivel and become unpalatable when stored uncovered in the
refrigerator. Most refrigerators provide at least one covered container called a ‘crisper’ for storage of
vegetables and fruits. Use of plastic bags for storage of clean dry vegetables and fruits, retards the
evaporation of moisture from them.
       Milk: Deterioration starts soon after the collection of milk. It is necessary to retard the changes
during storage, so that there is minimal loss of quality prior to the preparation and use. Some of the
steps taken to ensure quality during storage of these foods are discussed here.
       Milk is normally boiled in Indian homes, as soon as it is brought to the kitchen and stored in
covered containers. Boiling destroys spoilage organisms and also the enzymes present in milk. Thus
boiling helps to store milk in good condition for 12–24 hours, at room temperature. Milk is converted
to curd by inoculating it with buttermilk containing lactics. The conversion to curd and buttermilk,
helps to extend the storage period of milk by 24 hours. The storage life can be further extended by
storage in the refrigerator. Butter and cheese are also perishable products of which the storage period
can be extended to two weeks, by refrigeration.
       Fish, Meat Poultry: Fresh fish, meat, poultry can be kept for short periods at temperatures just
above freezing. Ground meat is more likely to spoil than roasts, chops, steaks, due to (i) the handling,
(ii) exposure of larger surface to air, and (iii) equipments. Organ meats such as liver, kidney, brain are
also more perishable than other cuts.
       Oxidation of fats in meats produces off-flavours and oxidation of meat pigments causes
discolouration. Both these are undesirable changes, which can be retarded by storing meat in the
coldest part of the refrigerator. The fats in pork and poultry are more easily oxidised than others.
Therefore, it is recommended that these meats be held for very short periods, prior to use.
       Shell Eggs should be refrigerated promptly. Flavour and quality changes occur rapidly if eggs are
held at room temperature, but very slowly at refrigerator temperature.

Study Questions and Activities
      1. List the criteria for selection of:
         (a) Rice, wheat, suji, maida.
         (b) Green leafy vegetables.
         (c) Fruits.
      2. List the foods, which are perishable. Discuss how to store these so as to retain nutrients.
      3. What are the criteria in selection of oils and fats?
      4. Discuss the statement “the period of storage of foods is related to the moisture content”.
      5. Discuss the factors that affect storage period of vegetables, fruits and eggs.
      6. What precautions will you take while storing rice, wheat, dal and maida? What type of
         losses are likely to occur if these precautions are not taken?
                                                                                CHAPTER 19


                                Food Preparation


     Reasons for Cooking Foods
     Quality of Food
     Preliminary Treatment of Foods
         Seasoning
     Food Preparation Techniques
     Methods of Food Preparation
        Choice of Fuel
     Medium of Food Preparation
        Water
        Steam
        Oil or Fat
        Air
     Combination of Methods
     Study Questions and Practical Activities


      FOOD IS A complex mixture of many different chemical components. The study of food
preparation involves understanding the changes that occur in these components during preparation as
a result of their interaction with one another, with the medium of cooking, the temperature of cooking
and the environment.
      Food preparation is an important step in meeting the nutritional needs of the family. It is not
enough that food be nutritious, it has to be pleasing in appearance and taste so that it is eaten. Good
preparation is an important prerequisite of food acceptance. Therefore, it is important to acquire the
ability to prepare and serve food, which is nutritious and acceptable to the family. The science of food
preparation is based on the understanding of physical and chemical changes that occur in food during
preparation.
      This knowledge can be used to combine food ingredients in diverse ways to prepare innumerable
combinations with delicate flavours, textures, and colour, which delight the senses. Thus food preparation
is both a science and an art. Food preparation is very much a part of the culture of the region. Each
region has its own methods of blending flavours to bring about acceptable combinations.
Food Preparation                                                                                       227


Reasons for Cooking Foods
     Most foods are acceptable only when they are cooked. Except for some fruits and vegetables,
most of the food we eat is cooked. Even the tea or coffee or milk we take in the morning and the bread
we take with it involves some manner of cooking. For centuries we have nurtured this art of cooking.
Let us see why we cook food.




                                     Figure 19.1: Food preparation.

      One of the foremost reasons for cooking is that it improves taste. Cooking does improve the taste
of as simple a food as rice. It also makes the food more palatable. The sight of a raw potato may not
even attract a hungry person but the sight of potato chips allures us to sample a few even when we are
not hungry. Thus cooking helps to enhance the taste and flavour of food and makes it more appetising.
      A number of desirable changes occur in foods during cooking. For instance vegetables become
soft. Starchy foods like cereals and dals take up water, swell and soften.
      Food preparation is very much a part of the culture of the region. Each region has its own
methods of blending flavours to bring about acceptable combinations. Spices and condiments are
added to the food and the food is simmered until the flavours blend. Some foods are also seasoned with
heated oil in which some of the spices are fried. These steps help to blend the flavours of the ingredients
and thus enhance the acceptability of the product.
      As cooking involves heating of foods, many microorganisms are destroyed, during the course of
cooking. This renders the food safe for eating. For example, boiling milk results in killing pathogens
like tubercle bacilli if these are present; spoilage organisms are also killed by heating milk. Therefore
heated milk keeps longer than unheated milk. Some of the toxins present in the foods are rendered
inactive at the cooking temperature. Thus cooking helps to remove heat-labile toxins.
      Cooking food helps to provide unlimited variety in the menu. Thus with the same raw foods it is
possible to provide innumerable dishes, which makes eating a pleasure.
      Cooked food is easily chewed and swallowed. It is easily acted on by digestive juices. This makes
its passage through the digestive tract smooth. In this manner, cooking improves the digestibility of
food.
228                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Quality of Food
      The condition of the food when it is brought into the kitchen determines the nature of the final
cooked product. Foods bought must be of good quality. Conditions of storage should be such that the
quality does not deteriorate during storage. Vegetable that have been stored too long, milk and milk
products that have deteriorated (i.e., dahi which is sour) and oils that are flat or rancid cannot improve
in the preparation. This does not mean that one must buy the most expensive foods in the market. But
it does mean that one must buy good quality food. Expensive foods need not necessarily be of good
quality.
Preliminary Treatment of Foods
      Only clean food is palatable. Food should be washed to remove surface dirt. Each food needs to
be handled carefully to ensure removal of adhering dirt without damaging its form and structure, and
causing loss of nutrients.
      Preliminary treatment of food includes washing, cleaning, peeling, cutting, slicing, grating, soaking,
germinating, fermenting, roasting, grinding or some other step.
      These procedures have to be carefully planned for each food so that the natural flavour and
texture are retained. Table 19.1 lists the type of preliminary treatments of various foods prior to
preparation.
                            Table 19.1: Preliminary Treatment of Foods

           Preliminary Treatment                        Foods
           Washing                                      Vegetables, fruits, whole grains
           Peeling, cutting, slicing, grating, cubing   Vegetables and fruits
           Pounding/milling/grinding                    Cereals, legumes, spices, nuts
           Soaking                                      Rice, dals, legumes
           Fermenting                                   Cereals, dals and their mixtures
           Germinating                                  Cereals and legumes
           Roasting                                     Whole cereals, legumes, nuts, semolina,
                                                        spices, etc.
           Mixing                                       All ingredients in preparations

           Kneading                                     Flours for breads, chapatis, puri, etc.

       The pre-preparation steps mentioned above need to be carried out in such a manner that nutrient
loss is minimised. For example, while washing rice and dal to remove external dirt, care must be taken
not to scrub the grain, which may lead to unnecessary loss of water-soluble nutrients. Vegetables and
fruits must be cut into even pieces, which are symmetrical and convey a sense of order. Some fruits
darken on cutting and peeling, e.g., apples. It may not be necessary to peel these. It is advisable to cut
such fruits just before use (Figure 19.2).
       Vegetables and fruits need to be drained after washing, to reduce spoilage. Soaking rice, dal and
whole legumes before cooking may result in reduced cooking time and improved texture.
Food Preparation                                                                                     229

     In short, care and planning in preliminary handling is essential to prepare an acceptable finished
product. Poor preliminary treatment cannot be corrected later.




                                                                   Cutting
                        Washing
                                               Peeling


                                 Figure 19.2: Steps in food preparation.

Seasoning
     Some foods require no seasoning. Others are improved by addition of small amounts of seasoning
materials. The purpose of seasoning is to enhance the flavour of the food and to make it more delectable.
Seasoning should be used judiciously so that it blends with the food flavour and is not excessive.

Food Preparation Techniques
      Good food preparation requires understanding of the composition and structure of food and the
changes that take place during preparation. Basic principles must be observed for each group of food
products to obtain good results. Skill in handling foods is acquired by applying knowledge of cooking
principles. Some techniques are more difficult to master than others; e.g., making an attractive salad is
easier than preparing vegetable cutlets.




                             Figure 19.3: Utensils used in food preparation.

      In addition good equipment used scientifically helps to achieve good results in food preparation
(Figs. 19.1, 19.3, 19.4, 19.5, 19.6). Knowledge of the correct recipe, which indicates the proportion of
230                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


various ingredients and the order and method of combining these helps to ensure a good product. As
books which give basic proportions and recipes of Indian dishes are few, one has to record one’s own
recipes and improve or modify them to create variety.
      The magic ingredient in food preparation is imagination. It is the ability to visualise the effect of
change in ingredients on the recipe in terms of flavour, texture and colour. As in any other art, practice
is essential but the practice must be intelligently directed. To be proficient in food preparation skills, one
must make efforts to observe carefully those who are proficient in food preparation and get opportunities
to handle food. The chance to organise and prepare dishes for parties at home, for the class and for
friends help to develop one’s skills and creative abilities. It must be remembered that foods are most
palatable and nutritious when served soon after preparation.




                                        Figure 19.4: Grinding stone.

      It is necessary to think of how the foods combine in terms of colour, flavour and texture.
Pleasing combinations increase the appeal of a meal. Here again, one can make innumerable combinations
from the same ingredients if one uses one’s experience and imagination.

Methods of Food Preparation
      Each food item can be prepared into several different dishes. The methods of cooking of these
items, however, are not many. The method used depends on the kind of product desired and the
ingredients available.
      Desirable appearance, colour, texture, flavour, odour and moisture must be retained or produced
in the course of preparation. To achieve these ends, it is necessary to understand the methods used in
the preparation of food.
Choice of Fuel
      Before we proceed with discussing the methods of cooking let us try to understand how heat
energy, which is necessary for all forms of cooking, is produced. The heat for cooking is usually
generated by the use of kerosene, gas, electricity, charcoal, wood or sawdust as fuel. The choice of
fuel depends on the availability and the comparative cost of various fuels. Ease with which the fuel
ignites and is put off and safety in use are also important considerations in the choice of fuel. Fuels,
which can be converted into heat energy without production of offensive by-products and leave none
or minimum residue, are preferred as they are economic and convenient to use.
Food Preparation                                                                                    231




                               Figure 19.5: Food preparation equipment.




                               Figure 19.6: Food preparation equipment.

     By these criteria the fuels may be listed in the order of preference thus cooking gas, electricity,
kerosene, charcoal, sawdust and wood. In practice, two more factors may affect our choice, availability
and cost.

Medium of Food Preparation
     The methods of cooking can be classified on the basis of the medium used for heat transfer. The
media normally used are water as such or in the form of steam, oil and air.
Water
     Water is most commonly used medium of cooking. Boiling, simmering and stewing are methods
in which moist heat is used. Many of the foods are cooked by using a combination of these methods.
232                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Boiling: The food is washed, covered with an adequate quantity of water and heated to boiling.
The intensity of heat is then reduced to keep the food simmering till done. The temperature of boiling
water is usually 100°C and when it simmers, the temperature may range from 85 to 90°C. If the food
is boiled continuously water is evaporated quickly, the structure and texture of the food product is
affected adversely (damaged) and the loss of heat-labile nutrients is increased. The continuous boiling
of food results in wastage of fuel also. Normally, boiling followed by simmering is used in food
preparation. Soups and broths are normally prepared by this method.
      Simmering and poaching are used to cook food by immersion in a liquid maintained at just below
the boiling point (85°C–90ºC) so that bubbles form slowly and collapse below the surface. As mentioned
earlier, most foods are brought to boil and allowed to simmer till done. Milk preparations such as
Kadhi, Kheer are prepared by simmering.
      Stewing refers to simmering food in a small quantity of liquid. The temperature of stewing is the
same as that of simmering. The food is stewed when the finished product is intended to contain a small
amount of liquid. Most of the vegetables and meats are prepared by this method.
      Foods cooked with water as the medium are heated by transfer of heat energy from the fuel
through the container to the water. Water is heated both by conduction and convection currents. The
time needed for cooking the food is thus dependent on the amount of food being cooked, the material,
thickness and size of the container and the efficiency of the fuel used.
      If the food is cooked in just enough water, it is necessary to reduce the heat, keep a watchful eye
and remove the food from the stove as soon as it is done to avoid burning the bottom layer of the food.
      The cooking of food with water as a medium will be affected by the quantity of dissolved
substances in it because the boiling point of water is elevated in the presence of solutes. At high
altitudes water boils at a lower temperature than at sea level and therefore cooking may take a longer
time than at sea level.
                            Table 19.2: Temperatures Used for Cooking


                Method of cooking                          Approximate temperature

                Simmering/stewing                                   95°–90°C
                Boiling/steaming                                       100°C
                Pressure cooking                                   110–112°C
                Baking                                           110°C–205°C1
                Deep fat frying                                    180–220°C

          1. The temperature attained by the food is only about 43°C


Steam
     Steaming of food also involves the use of moist heat. When food is cooked in water vapour with
or without pressure it is said to be steamed. The water vapour is produced from water placed at the
bottom of the pan. Some of the products that are prepared by steaming are idli, khaman-dhokla,
modak, etc.
Food Preparation                                                                                       233

Pressure Cooking: When steam under pressure is used the method is known as pressure cooking and
the equipment used is known as a pressure cooker. As the temperature is elevated quickly in the food
cooked with steam under pressure, the cooking period is reduced as also the loss of heat-labile nutrients.
In this method, heat is transferred from the steam to the food; the steam condenses on the cold food
and heat is released. Condensation of the steam occurs until the food reaches the temperature of steam
(100°C); then the condensation decreases and steam pressure is built-up in the pressure cooker, to the
point desired. Rice, dal, some pieces of meat, potatoes and other roots and tubers, and various types of
beans, and peas and some gourds are cooked in the pressure cooker.
      Steam cooked foods are light, fluffy and easily digestible. As the period of cooking is reduced,
the loss of heat-labile nutrients is minimised and there is saving of fuel and time. As the steaming of
food does not need constant attention as in simmering or stewing, the time saved can be used for other
activities such as preparing salad, chapati or dessert.
Oil or Fat
      Oil or fat is used as a medium of cooking in pan-frying and deep fat frying. Pan-frying or shallow
frying is the cooking of food in a lightly greased pan, e.g., dosai, thalipeeth, fried egg, pancake, puda,
etc. The heat is transferred mainly by conduction to the food. Only a thin layer of mix or thin pieces of
food are cooked in this manner. The food must be turned from one side to another to ensure complete
cooking.
      Deep fat frying is similar to boiling. The fat is heated by conduction of heat from the frying pan;
the heat is then distributed by convection currents through the fat. The food is cooked very quickly by
this method as the fats can be heated to much higher temperatures than boiling water. Therefore, it
needs constant and careful attention. The temperature of frying varies from 180–220°C depending on
the oil or fat used as a frying medium and food preparation being made. It is important to choose fats
with high smoking temperature as the frying medium. Fats and oils should not be heated to the smoking
point1 as at this temperature the fat starts decomposing, and is not suitable for frying foods.
      Frying imparts a special flavour and texture to the foods making it tender or crunchy. There is an
increase in the energy value of the food when it is fried. The high temperature used destroys any
pathogens present on the surface.
      These foods are not digested quickly, due to the fat absorbed in frying. This method is not
suitable for tough cuts of meat. It is used to make puries, pakoras, samosas, chips cutlets, etc.
Air (dry heat)
       Methods in which air is used as a principal cooking medium include roasting, baking, broiling and
grilling.
       Roasting means to cook food by dry heat without covering it. Food is roasted or baked on heated
metal, on stones or under hot coals, in hot ashes and/or in an oven.
       Foods prepared by this method include chapati, roti, nan, and other unleavened breads, potatoes,
sweet potatoes, other tubers, jowar, corn, paddy, groundnuts, cashewnuts, walnuts, pistachios, etc.
       Baking is also cooking by dry heat in an oven or oven-like appliance, covered or uncovered
containers may be used for baking. The food placed in the oven, to bake or roast may be partially

1. Smoking-point of fat is the temperature at which decomposition starts with emission of blue smoke, which
   is irritating.
234                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

cooked by dry heat, by the convection currents of hot dry air and conduction of heat from the container
to the food and partially by moist heat. Hot sand baths are used in baking on top of the stove. In this
improvised method, the baking dish is placed in the sand bath, which is then covered to prevent loss of
heat. Bread, cakes, pies, pastries are examples of baked products. The temperatures attained in different
methods are given in Table 19.2.
      Broiling or grilling refers to cooking of food by exposing it to direct heat. The food is cooked in
part by contact with the hot broiler (conduction) and partially due to the radiant heat energy. Grilled
sandwiches are an example of this method of cooking.

Combination of Methods
     Many food preparation are made by using a combination of methods. When we roast semolina
before putting it in boiling water for preparing upma or season vegetables with oil and spices and then
add water, two cooking media—air and water, fat and water are used. It may be noted that many food
preparations are made by using more than one method of heat transfer.

Sudy Questions and Practical Activities
      1. List the reasons for cooking food.
      2. What are the preliminary steps in food preparation? What is the function of two of these in
           preparation of an acceptable food product?
      3. Write notes on:
            (i) Simmering
           (ii) Stewing
          (iii) Steaming
          (iv) Pressure-cooking.
      4. Discuss the advantages and disadvantages of using oil as a medium of cooking.
           Food Selection and Preparation
           Practical Work to include
           Methods of food preparation:
            (i) Cereals
           (ii) Pulses and legumes
          (iii) Vegetables and salads
          (iv) Fruit
           (v) Meat and eggs
          (vi) Milk
         (vii) Snacks
        (viii) Desserts.
      Observe changes in colour, texture and flavour during and after preparation.
                                                                              CHAPTER 20


 Effect of Preparation on Food Components


     Carbohydrates
        Starches
        Sugars
        Pectins and Gums
        Celluloses and Hemicelluloses
     Proteins
     Oils and Fats
     Minerals
     Vitamins
     Pigments
     Flavour Components
     Retention of Nutritive Value During Preparation
     Study Questions



     A NUMBER OF changes occur in the food components as a result of preparation. It is necessary
to understand and manipulate the changes to obtain an acceptable food product.
     The major constituents of food are carbohydrates, proteins, fats and their derivatives and water.
In addition, a number of inorganic mineral components and a diverse group of organic substances are
present in very small amounts in foods. These include pigments, flavour components, vitamins, acids,
enzymes, etc. Let us consider their properties and the changes that occur in these components during
handling, cooking and processing.

Carbohydrates
      Starch, sugars, pectins, gums, celluloses and hemicelluloses are the important carbohydrates
found in foods.
      Starches are the major component of cereals, millets, dals, roots, tubers, and sago. Starches are
bland in taste, not readily soluble in cold water but absorb water when soaked in cold water. When
starch granules are added to cold water, a temporary suspension is formed, the starch tends to settle
out as soon as the mixture is allowed to stand.
236                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       When dry starch is mixed with warm or hot water, the part which comes in contact with water
becomes sticky and the starch granules cling together in lumps. Heating does not help to separate the
granules, because once formed the lumps stay intact. If one of these lumps is broken open, raw starch
is found inside.
       Lump formation can be prevented by mixing starch with a little cold water before introducing it
into the hot water; roasting a little before addition of hot water or addition of a little fat, helps to separate
the starch granules and allows them to gelatinise separately. The starches take up water, swell and
burst on cooking. When a starch and water mixture is heated, it becomes translucent and forms a
paste. This change is accompanied by a change in viscosity. This property is used when starch is used
as a thickener in soups, starch puddings and other preparations. A gel is formed at a higher concentration
of starch, e.g., puddings. The water is held in a physical bond by the starch. The change in texture,
colour and physical state, which occurs when starch is heated in water, is known as gelatinisation of
starch. In roots and tubers, the presence of starch, which absorbs the water during cooking, results in
retention of size.
       Sugars: About 5–11 per cent are present in ripe fruits, malted beverages and in milk. Sucrose the
sugar we use in food preparations is one of the pure, manufactured (extracted) foods we use daily. It
is manufactured from sugarcane or sugarbeet. Sugar is sweet and is usually used in foods for its
sweetening power.
       Sugar dissolves in water and when heated this solution easily forms a syrup. When the solution is
supersaturated and cooked, crystallisation occurs. This is the process used to prepare sweets such as
laddus, candies, etc.
       When a high concentration of sugar is used it acts as a preservative by binding moisture, e.g.,
preserves such as murrabbas, jams and jellies. In the presence of acids, the sugar (sucrose) is partially
hydrolysed to form glucose and fructose, which is known as invert sugar, which is more soluble than
sucrose. If sugar is heated beyond its melting point it caramelises or browns. the caramel formed has
a bitter, astringent flavour. Sugars are readily fermented by microorganisms, thus causing spoilage of
food products containing it.
       Pectins and gums are responsible for holding the plant cells together. These are found in fruits
and vegetables in a very small amount. Pectins and gums form colloidal solution when extracted in hot
water and contribute to the viscosity of the product to which they are added. Therefore, these are used
as thickeners and stabilisers in food preparation and processing. Pectins form gels in the presence of an
appropriate amount of sugar and acid, e.g., fruit jellies.
       Celluloses and hemicelluloses, the fibrous parts of vegetables and fruits are not soluble in cold or
hot water. These soften as the water trapped in their tissues is released and used in cooking or processing.
Thus there is a decrease in volume, especially of leafy vegetables. Celluloses are not digested by man
even after cooking but as it has the capacity to bind moisture, it is helpful in smooth movement of the
food through the digestive tract.

Proteins
      Egg, fish, poultry and meat are good examples of protein foods. In dals and legumes the presence
of a large amount of starch (50-60 per cent) masks the reactions of proteins during preparation.
      All proteins are first denatured and then coagulated by heat. The coagulation occurs between 65
and 90°C. The temperature of coagulation increases with the addition of other ingredients. For example,
egg proteins coagulate at 65–70°C, but egg custard coagulates at 85–90°C. Cooking results in softening
Effect of Preparation on Food Components                                                                237

of proteins in foods such as eggs, fish, poultry, meat, as water is bound in the process of coagulation.
If the coagulated protein is further heated, it loses moisture and becomes dry and rubbery. Therefore,
it is important to monitor the temperature and time while preparing these foods. Proteins are precipitated
by change of pH, e.g., addition of lemon juice to milk to prepare paneer. Proteins bind water, if the
coagulation is gradual, e.g., addition of lactic inoculum results in the formation of solid curd from
liquid milk.

Oils and Fats
      Milk, eggs, meat, oilseeds are foods, which contain fat. When foods containing fat are heated, the
fat has a tendency to separate from the food. For example, heating milk results in the fat layer floating
on top, while in cooking meat fat is released as drippings. When milk is curdled to prepare curd, the
cream layer is always on top of the curd.
      Oilseeds are extracted to obtain pure oil, butter is clarified in the manufacture of ghee (butter fat).
Oils and fats are used as a cooking medium. Since these have a higher boiling point than water, the food
is cooked quicker in fat. Some fat is absorbed during frying, the amount absorbed depends on a
number of factors such as the composition and consistency of the food being fried, the temperature
used and the nature of the fat used for frying. Fried foods have a higher energy value as compared to
the same foods prepared by other methods such as boiling or baking. Fats which are solid (congeal) at
room temperature, soften on heating, but do not have a sharp melting-point. When heated beyond its
boiling-point, a fat smokes (smoke point), then flashes (flash point) and lastly it catches fire (fire
point). If the fat is heated for a long time, it browns and thickens. These changes are accompanied by
changes in flavour, which may not be acceptable. Therefore effort should be made to minimise these in
food preparation.
      Fats and oils are used to prepare food emulsions with water and air. Stabilisers such as proteins,
gums, starches, finely ground spices, in small amounts are used to stabilise these emulsions.
      Fat has shortening power, i.e., its presence between (protein and starch) layers makes the product
crunchy (e.g., baked goods); its presence in meats tenderises it.
      Fats and oils become rancid by action of air (oxidised), water (hydrolysis) and enzymes. These
changes must be minimised, so that the foods in which fat is used remain acceptable.

Minerals
     There is no loss of minerals in the normal cooking procedures. If cooking water is discarded,
some (a small fraction of) water-soluble minerals may be lost.

Vitamins
      As we know thiamin and vitamin C are the two vitamins, which are most affected by cooking.
The losses may occur due to dissolved nutrients being discarded and destruction due to exposure to
heat in cooking. The amount lost depends on a number of factors.
      Thiamin is partly lost in solution and is also destroyed by heat. Some thiamin loss occurs when
rice and dal are scrubbed and washed repeatedly prior to cooking. Being soluble in water, if the
cooking water is discarded some thiamin is lost. The losses of thiamin in normal cooking vary from 10
to 25 per cent.
238                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Vitamin C is the most labile vitamin. It is water soluble, is easily oxidised and is also affected by
heat. Washing vegetables after cutting, exposing cut vegetables to air for long periods before cooking
and/or serving, result in the loss of a part of the vitamin C present. The average cooking or processing
losses range from 30 to 35 per cent. Therefore, cooking procedures that minimise the loss of vitamin
C result in conserving all other nutrients.

Pigments
       Colour of food has much to do with its acceptance and enjoyment. Vegetables and fruits contribute
a variety of colours to the dietary. The plant pigments chlorophyll (green leafy vegetables), carotenoids
(yellow-orange carrots), flavonoids (white potatoes) and anthocyanins (red beetroot) are present singly
or incombination in plant foods. These may be affected by the method of preparation. The soluble
pigments such as anthocyanins may leach in the cooking water and changes may occur due to the
effect of heat and pH (acidity). Table 20.1 summarises the properties of plant pigments, understanding
these may help us in retaining the colour of vegetables and fruits. Other colour changes include the
change in meat pigment during cooking.
       When milk is heated slowly it browns a little due to the reaction of sugar, (lactose) with amino
acids. This is a change which is accompanied by flavour changes, which are enjoyed when these are
very slight; if excessive, these are not liked. Similarly caramelisation of sugar, slight browning of
starch in roasting, bring about colour changes, which are liked when these are slight, but not when
these are excessive and give the dark brown colour of burnt food.
       Some colour changes, which occur during food preparation are undesirable and efforts are made
to minimise these. For example, certain fruits and vegetables such as some varieties of apples and
brinjals brown when cut surfaces are exposed to air. Efforts made to avoid exposure of the cut surfaces
to air include-brinjals are cut into water, apples are covered with sugar and/or lime juice, fruit salad is
served with custard.
                              Table 20.1: Properties of Plant Pigments

  S.No.       Food         Name of                     Soluble       Effect of      In presence of
             source        pigment         Colour        in         prolonged
                                                                       heat         acid         alkali

   1.     Rice Potato    Flavones         White or      Water      May darken      White        Yellow
                         Flavanols        Yellowish

   2.     Beetroot       Anthocyanin      Red           Water      Little          Bright       Reddish
                                                                                   red          purple

   3.     Leafy          Chlorophyll      Green         Fat        Olive           Olive        Intense
          vegetables                                               green           green        green

   4.     Carrot         Carotene         Yellow-       Fat        May darken      No           No
          Mango          Xanthophyll      orange                                   change       change
          Tomato         Lycopene
Effect of Preparation on Food Components                                                                  239


Flavour Components
      Sugars, mineral salts, organic acids and salts are the flavour components found in fruits and
vegetables. In addition salt, sugar, acid, herbs and spices are used in food preparation to modify or
enhance the natural flavour of foods during preparation.
      Salt is the most widely used seasoning in food preparation. When used in pickles, it draws out the
water from the fruit or vegetable and binds it in solution. Organic acids used in food preparation are
lemon juice (citric acid), vinegar (acetic acid), tamarind extract (tartaric acid), and cocum extract.
Tomato juice and mango pulp are also used in preparations for the acidity these contribute. Some of
these extracts contribute thickness as well as acidity to the product. Some of the organic acids slow
down bacterial action and therefore are used as preservatives in pickles. Lactic acid produced in milk,
coagulates milk proteins to form curd and cheese. This change is accompanied by a change in flavour
and texture.
      Oxidants and antioxidants: When food is exposed to air, oxyge n from the air acts as an oxidant,
and changes occur that are mostly undesirable. For example when cut surfaces of vegetables and fruits
are exposed to air, vitamin C is partially lost due to oxidation, the surfaces become brown in colour;
fats and oils become flat and then rancid. the metals, copper and iron act as catalysts in such oxidations.
therefore, these metals are not suitable for use in food preparation or processing.
      Some natural substances such as vitamin E, lecithin, some sulphur-containing amino acids act as
antioxidants. These inhibit or prevent oxidation of fats and oils and other substances during storage and
preparation. For example, vitamin E is found in some oils and prevents rancidity in these.
      Enzymes are organic catalysts and control a number of reaction in vegetables and fruits. Ripening
of fruits as well as over-ripening is controlled by enzymes. When fruits and vegetables are cooked or
exposed to heat, e.g., blanching of vegetables before freezing, enzymes are inactivated. Purified enzymes
are used to modify texture of foods. For example, papain is used to tenderise meat and rennin is used
to coagulate milk protein in cheese making.

Retention of Nutritive Value During Preparation
      It is important that all efforts should be made to retain the nutritive value of foods, during
preparation. Another important objective in food preparation is to make food that is enjoyed by those
who eat it. It is important to ensure that while retaining the nutritive value of the food, palatability is not
sacrificed. It’s good to remember that the food can provide nutrients to the body only after it is eaten.
For example, some loss of thiamin (a vitamin of the B-complex) occurs when beans are cooked. But as
we do not relish uncooked beans, we do cook beans and try to take care in the preparation to ensure
that the loss is minimal. Thus we cook beans in just enough water to avoid loss of nutrients in the
cooking water. We cook beans for the minimum time required. We can reduce, cooking time by using
a pressure cooker, if possible. We can prepare the food just before serving, so that reheating before
serving, is avoided.
      Some simple rules for retaining nutritive value and flavour are given below:
       1. Wash vegetables before cutting.
       2. Cut vegetables just before cooking and introduce cut vegetables into boiling water, if to be
            cooked in water.
       3. Use just enough water for cooking, if the vegetables or other foods are to be served as such.
       4. Cook foods until just done and serve immediately.
240                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      5. When preparing soups, the slowest cooking ingredient should be added first, followd by
         addition of other ingredients, which cook in shorter time. For example, meat needs longer
         time and hence can be cooked half-way before adding vegetables, which need much less
         time. This procedure helps to avoid overcooking of the vegetables.
      6. Spices and other flavour ingredients should be added in the oil used for seasoning, as the
         flavour compounds which are soluble in fat, are thus easily dispersed in the preparation with
         the oil or fat.
      7. Vegetables, salads should be prepared just before serving.
      8. Use of acid foods, such as lime juice, tomatoes, vinegar or yogurt as dressings in salads
         prevents loss of vitamin C, because it is stable in acid medium.
      9. Fruits are best eaten as they have been customarily eaten in tropics. Bananas are eaten right
         after peeling. Oranges are usually sucked after peeling. Grape fruit is usually peeled and
         eaten. Mangoes are sucked to get the juice. In this manner of eating, no loss of vitamin C
         occurs, as the fruit is not much exposed before eating.

Effects of Cooking on the Microbial Quality of Food
      As cooking involves heating of foods, many microorganisms are destroyed during cooking. This
renders the food safe for eating. For example, boiling milk results in killing pathogens like tubercle
bacilli if these are present; spoilage organisms are also killed by heating milk. Therefore heated milk
keeps longer than unheated milk. Some of the toxins present in the foods are rendered inactive at the
cooking temperature. Thus cooking helps to destroy heat-labile toxins.

Study Questions
      1. Discuss the changes that occur in starch during food preparation. Give examples to illustrate
         the changes you describe.
      2. Write short notes on:
         (a) Invert sugar,
         (b) Pectin,
          (c) Smoke-point,
         (d) Plant pigments,
          (e) Caramel,
          (f) Flavour components.
      3. List the changes that occur in proteins during food preparation with examples to illustrate
         the change.
      4. Discuss the steps which help to retain nutrients during food preparation. Which are the
         nutrients easily lost during food preparation?
      5. How will you prevent the nutrient losses from the following foodstuffs:
         (a) Green leafy vegetables,
         (b) Milk,
          (c) Meats and eggs,
         (d) Citrus fruits.
                                                                                CHAPTER 21


          Factors Affecting Food Acceptance


     Colour in Food
        Colour Added to Foods
     Texture in Food
         Cereals
         Fruits & Vegetables
         Meat
     Flavour in Food
         Odour
         Touch
         Taste
     Flavouring Substances
         Salt
         Acids
         Herbs and Spices
         Flavouring Extracts
         Use of Spices and Flavourings
     Study Questions



     WE SPEND a number of hours each day to plan, purchase, prepare and enjoy food. A large part
of our income is utilised to purchase food for the family. Therefore, it is important to understand
personal preferences in food, for without attention to the sensory aspects of food, there can be no true
enjoyment of it. Let us consider the factors which affect our food acceptance.

Colour in Food
      Colour affects our acceptance of food. It is said we eat with our eyes, because the first impression
of foods is formed by its appearance, which includes colour, shape and aroma. The initial attraction or
rejection of food depends on its looks.
Most of our traditional or rejection of food depends on its looks. Most of our traditional colour concepts
affect our reaction to food. For example, we associate orange-yellow colour with ripe mangoes, red
242                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


colour with ripe tomatoes and green colour with leafy vegetables. A green orange or a light coloured
tomato looks unripe or anaemic and does not attract us.
      The colour of food is one way to judge its quality. For example, a green colour is associated with
unripe fruit such as mango or orange, a brown banana is thought to be spoilt. In food purchase, colour
is used as an important criteria of quality. For example, mature ripe alfonso mangoes have orange-
yellow colour. Hence, if the colour is not always a true indicator of quality. Some varieties of oranges
have a green colour even when these are mature, while orange coloured fruit may have sections, which
are not juicy.
      It is observed that fruit preserves and vegetable pickles darken during storage. Such darkening is
caused by oxidative changes. These changes can be minimised by reducing the oxygen in the top of the
container by heat before sealing it. The presence of traces of metals such as iron, tin and copper, in
foods also causes darkening and needs to be avoided.
      Colour added to foods: Since colour affects food acceptance, it is added to food products during
processing to improve its acceptance. Fruit preserves, cheese, butter, icecream, cakes, confections
and candies are some of the food products that have such addition of colour. When we buy these
products, it is important to select appropriate delicate colour, to ensure attractive, acceptable appearance.
      Colouring materials used in foods belong to two groups—natural colouring material and synthetic
coal-tar dyes. After extensive testing, it has been found that only some of the coal-tar dyes can be
safely used in foods; and these have been certified. Some of these are used in carbonated beverages
and fruit preserves.
      Some of the natural colouring matters, which we use in food preparation, are turmeric and
saffron. In addition to these, other natural colouring substances used in food preparations are annato,
betain, caramel, carotene and chlorophyll.

Texture in Foods
      Each food has a particular texture that we associate with it. Thus well-cooked rice is soft, potato
wafers are crisp and cucumber slice has a crunchy texture. We learn about food texture very early in
our eating experience.
      A variety of qualities are included in texture, such as, crisp, soft, hard, sticky, elastic, tough,
gummy or stringy. If there is change in the accepted, characteristic texture, we find the food unacceptable.
Thus we reject tough beans, hard rice, lumpy upma, and fibrous vegetables, because their texture is
unlike the texture we associate with these foods. On the other hand, we enjoy crisp toast, soft velvety
halwas, flaky pastry and sticky jalebi. The textural qualities of food depend on the ingredients, their
proportion, the manner in which these are combined and the method of preparation.
      Cereals: Texture is developed with meticulous care in cereal preparations such as chapati, bread,
and cakes. In preparation of chapati, we knead the dough and set it aside for a few minutes to obtain
a soft velvet textured chapati. In preparation of bread, the dough is allowed to ferment after mixing
with yeast, punched to ensure even, sponge-like structure. In making cakes, the sugar and fat are
creamed, the flour is sifted to incorporate air, and mixed with the creamed sugar to obtain the desired
structure, when baked.
      Fruits and Vegetables: The texture of fruits and vegetables is determined by the cell wall. The cell
wall is composed of polysaccharides. During maturation, ripening and preparation, there are changes
in the amount and kinds of polysaccharides, which result in changes in the texture of vegetables and
Factors Affecting Food Acceptance                                                                       243

fruits. For example, when a fruit ripens, a large part of starch is broken down to sugars, resulting in
softening of texture and change in flavour of the fruit. When a bean gets mature, the bean toughens and
gets lignified, its texture becomes very hard and it needs more time to cook than the immature bean.
There is a change in the taste also. Thus the texture of the food affects the time taken to cook or
process it. It also affects its acceptability.
       Meal: As you know the texture of meat depends on the part of the animal from which the cut is
taken, the age of the animal and the method of preparation and the duration. The meat cuts with low
content of connective tissue, can be cooked by dry methods, such as roasting or shallow frying. But
meat cuts, which have a large amount of connective tissue, are prepared by use of moist methods of
preparation, such as pressure-cooking, boiling or stewing, to make these cuts tender.
       The texture of meat is very easily determined by the number of times one needs to chew and how
hard one has to bite to cut the piece. If it takes long to chew the meat, it is a tough product. It is
possible to improve the texture of meat by treating tough meat with chemical tenderisers. These help to
break down the connective tissue partially and thus improve the texture of the product.

Flavour in Food
       Flavour is the sum-total of the sensory impression formed, when we eat food. It includes the
aroma, the taste and even the texture, and thus involves all our senses. It is the most important aspect
of food, which decides our choices of food. While an appropriate colour and texture may induce us to
sample a food, whether we will eat more of it, depends on its flavour. Thus flavour of food is as
important a quality as its nutritional composition.
       Food flavour is intimately related to food preparation practices. We like flavour of foods made in
our home in our community and region, because these are familiar to us. Thus food flavour acceptance
is intimately related to our dietary pattern. If our exposure to food flavours has been limited, it is not
easy for us to adapt to new flavours, and we may not enjoy a variety of flavours.
       Odour: The odour or smell of food influences our food acceptance. The aroma of ripe mango
attracts us, while the smell of overripe fruit repels us. The substances, which are responsible for odour
of food, are volatile, which means these evaporate and form vapours easily. The odours are carried by
the air to our nose, and are transmitted by special nerves (olfactory nerves) to our brain. You can get
the odour even before you eat the food; you also perceive the odour when you eat the food. The odour
affects our acceptance of food, depending on whether it is liked or not. The primary odours are sweet
or fragrant, sour or acid, burnt and rancid. You may have noticed that our sense of smell is far more
acute than the sense of taste. Therefore anything that affects its function, impairs our enjoyment of
food. For example, if you suffer from a cold, your sense of smell is impaired and you find that the food
does not taste as good as when you are well. Similarly, the function of sensory organs is impaired with
age, which results in decreased enjoyment of food by the aged persons.
       Touch: The sense of touch contributes to our perception of food. It identifies the textural qualities
of the food, such as softness and hardness. Similarly, we perceive the crisp, the crunchy or sticky
texture by touching the food. When the touch conforms to the textural profile of the food in our
memory, it enhances the anticipation and enjoyment of food. If it does not create a favourable image,
we hesitate to taste the food. For example, a slimy touch indicates spoilage, be it a carrot or a bread
slice.
       Taste: Taste sensations are the sum-total of the sensations created by food when it is put in the
mouth. The sensation of taste is perceived when the taste receptors (taste buds) are stimulated. The
244                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

taste buds are located on the surface of the tongue. The food must be dissloved in liquid to enable us to
perceive its taste. Hence we have to masticate dry foods such as roasted groundnuts mix these with
saliva, so that we can taste these. We can perceive the taste of liquids, such as tea, sherbet or lassi,
immediately, as these can stimulate the taste buds as soon as we drink these.
      There are four primary taste sensations—sweet, sour, salty and bitter. The taste of the food is
determined by its chemical composition. Sugars present in foods or added to foods are responsible for
sweet taste, while salty taste is due to salts present in foods or added to food. Sour or acid taste is
contributed mainly by organic acids found in foods (such as citric acid in limes), added to foods (such
as tamarind extract added to dal) or developed in food (lactic acid formed when milk is made into
curd).
      Certain foods such as coffee beans and fenugreek have bitter taste, while breakdown of proteins
produces substances, with bitter taste. The taste of most foods is a blend of these primary tastes.
      The primary tastes can be modified by combination of the compounds responsible for these. For
example, the sourness of lime can be reduced by addition of sugar; the bitterness of fenugreek is
reduced by adding coconut and jaggery. Thus you find that a variety of steps can be taken to modify
the flavour of natural foods. We can use flavouring substances, naturally present in foods or those
synthesised in the factory, during food preparation and processing to improve acceptability and add
variety to our diet.

Flavouring Substances
      A variety of materials are used in food preparation and processing to enhance, blend and alter the
natural flavours. Appropriate use of these can make a insipid dish into a highly palatable product. There
is ample scope for creativity in use of flavouring substances in food preparation. A large variety of
flavouring substances are used in Indian homes. These include salt, a variety of acidic substances,
herbs and spices, and extracts of herbs and spices.
      Salt: Salt is the most widely used condiment. It is one of the few pure chemicals used in food
preparation. It is obtained by evaporation of sea water. It is used to season all food preparations except
sweets. It is used in food preservation to make pickles, chutneys and sauces. Salt has the unique
property of enhancing the flavour of herbs and spices in food preparations.
      Acids: Lemon juice, tamarind, cocum, amchur and vinegar are the acid substances very commonly
used in Indian homes. Lemon juice is used in salads and savoury preparations such as upma, batatepohe,
bhel, etc. Tamarind is soaked and the acid extract thus obtained is used in sambar, rasam, puliyore
(tamarind rice), and many other vegetable preparations in the southern parts of India. In western India,
where ratambi (the fruit from which cocum is made) is available, cocum is used in food preparation.
Vinegar is dilute acetic acid. It is used to flavour salads, pickles, and sauces. Amchur, made from raw
mangoes, is also used in some preparations to impart acidic taste.
      Herbs and Spices: India is known as the ‘Home of Spices’. Spices and herbs form an indispensable
part of our cultural food pattern. These impart a subtle flavour to foods. Their presence is evident by
their irresistible aroma, which whets our appetite. They add zest to otherwise insipid foods. Hence
these are the most important group of flavouring materials in the Indian cuisine.
      Spices and herbs come from various parts of plants, such as the fruits, seeds, berries, roots,
rhizomes, leaves, the bark, the floral parts, kernel, aril and exudate of bark. The flavour is due to small
amounts of essential oils and organic acids present in the specific part of the plant. Each one of these
Factors Affecting Food Acceptance                                                                      245


has a characteristic component, which is responsible for its individual flavour. These are available as
whole dried spices and as ground powders also. One problem associated with spices is adulteration. As
these are expensive products, ground hulls, sawdust, and other waste materials are added to increase
the bulk and thus increase profit margin. Microscopic and chemical tests can help to identify the
adulterants.
      Flavouring Extracts: Flavouring extracts are obtained from spices by extraction with alcohol,
steam distillation or by expression in a press. These are normally solutions of the essential oils in
alcohol. These are best stored in a cool place in tightly stoppered containers. As these are concentrated
solutions of the flavour, very minute amount is needed to be added to impart the desired flavour. Some
of the flavouring extracts available include ginger, cardamom, saffron, vanilla, orange, cinnamon, etc.
      Many synthetic chemical compounds are now available in the market, which have a flavour
similar to that of the natural extract. These are used extensively, because these are much cheaper than
the natural flavouring extracts.
      Use of Spices and Flavourings: These are added to the food normally towards the end of preparation.
There is no set proportion, which is acceptable to all, as individual variation in the tolerance to these is
very great.
      Spices may be used in the whole or powdered form. Whole spices are usually added to hot oil as
a seasoning, before being dispersed in the food preparation. Oil acts as a solvent for the flavour
components present in the spices. Ground spices may be added to the food directly, e.g., pepper, jeera
powder, spice mix, etc.
      Herbs are normally cut and simmered in hot fat or oil to extract the, characteristic flavour before
being added to the preparation. As prolonged cooking will cause loss of volatile components, it is
advisable to add flavouring material towards the end of preparation. As you may know, these materials
are very light and very small amount is needed to impart the flavour. For example, a teaspoonful sambar
podi weighs only two grammes, and it is sufficient to flavour about 600 milliliters of sambar. Thus it
amounts to only 1 part in 300, but its contribution to improving the palatability of the product is truly
remarkable. In the use of flavouring materials it is good to remember that while a small addition is good,
more of it may result in decreased acceptability of the food product. So you must practice moderation
in use of these materials.

Study Questions
      1.   Discuss the texture of food with reference to cereals, fruit and meat.
      2.   What are the primary odours? Explain how these affect food acceptance.
      3.   List the various flavouring substances used in foods.
      4.   What are flavouring extracts and how are these prepared?
                                                                                CHAPTER 22


                  Food Sanitation and Hygiene


     Water
        Sources of Contamination of Water
        Treatment of Water
     Food
        Food Handling
        Food Contamination
     Equipment
     Control of Insects and Rodents
     Practical Rules for Food Sanitation
     Study Questions
     Laboratory and Practical Work
     References



      FOOD SANITATION implies cleanliness in the producing, preparing, storing and serving of
food and water. Food sanitation is an essential aspect of food preparation. It needs to be emphasised at
every stage of food handling and preparation. Some of the items which need particular attention are:
       (i) a safe and potable water supply,
      (ii) selection of wholesome ingredients and
     (iii) hygienic handling, during preparation and serving.
           These steps prevent entry of spoilage and pathogenic organisms in the food.
      In addition, all the equipment coming in contact with food should be scrupulously clean; the
surroundings should be clean and there should be a proper and safe method for the disposal of waste.
Inculcation of hygienic habits would help in preventing foods from being contaminated during handling.

Water
      Water is essential in food preparation. It is used to wash food before cooking, it is used to act as
a cooking medium, it is used to clean the containers of food before and after preparation and it is used
also as the most important beverage. Therefore, it is essential that all water meant for drinking and
cooking purposes should be free from pathogenic bacteria. Water used for making ice must also be
Food Sanitation and Hygiene                                                                                  247

potable. The ice may be used to cool foods or added to cold drinks. Thus it is important to ensure that
the ice we sometimes buy be made from potable water. Some of the diseases, which can be spread by
the use of contaminated water are cholera, typhoid, paratyphoid, bacillary dysentery and amoebic
dysentery.
Potable Water
      Water, which is free from pathogenic bacteria and is palatable, is known as potable water. The
necessity of a potable water supply in the home and place of work can never be overemphasised. It is
also important in institutions preparing, processing and serving food.


                          (a) Water source far from
                                    home




                 Home                                  5 km                               Well

                        (b) Water-limited availability




         Water runs bet. 6-7 a.m.                                        Queue for
                                                                          water


                           Figure 22.1: When water is scarce, sanitation suffers.
                       (a) Water sources far from home (b) Water—limited availability

      Apart from the primary precaution to ensure that water be free from harmful bacteria, it is also
necessary to make it palatable. For example, water may contain dissolved salts or minerals, which may
give it a brackish taste. For specific uses such as chemical analyses water may have to be given special
treatment with resins to remove dissolved impurities or salts. We will concern ourselves mainly with
the treatment of water to render it safe for potable purposes.
      In India, even though the necessity of using ‘pure water’ has been known for centuries1, there
was no safe and protected water supply up to 1949 for as much as 81 per cent of the population who
stay mostly in the villages.


1. In some of the Sanskrit texts written around the year 2000 B.C., it has been stated that ‘it is good to keep
   water in a copper vessel, to expose it to sunlight and to filter it in charcoal’. Similarly, another text says,
   ‘Water should be purified by boiling over fire, by heating in the sun, or by dropping a heated iron in it and
   then allowing it to cool; or it may be purified by filtering through coarse sand gravel.’
248                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       The National Water Supply and Sanitation Programme was launched in 1954 as a part of the
Health Plan to assist the States in their urban and rural water supply and sanitation schemes so as to
provide adequate water supply and sanitation facilities in the whole country. By 1979, 2,108 towns had
been provided with water benefiting an urban population of one hundred million people. 217 towns
with a population of forty million people (about 36 per cent of the urban population) had been covered
by partial sewerage system. Of the 5,76,000 villages it is estimated that more than two lakh problem
villages remained to be covered with potable water supply as on April 1,1980. Efforts are being made
to meet the water and sanitation needs of the entire country.2
       Even today the average Indian, educated or uneducated, a villager or a city-dweller, is very
particular about seeing that the vessels used for storage of water is not contaminated in the home. So
it is not the use in the home but the source of the water supply which may be suspect.
Sources of Contamination of Water
       The usual source of contamination of water is through the seepage of sewage.
       Sewage can be a carrier of many pathogenic bacteria because many healthy persons may be
‘carriers’ of pathogenic bacteria without being affected themselves. Persons who are suffering from
enteric diseases will also contribute to the presence of bacteria in sewage. The disposal of sewage is
not paid much attention to, especially in the rural communities, where human excreta is deposited near
shallow wells, ponds or even rivers; contamination from this source is widespread.
       In cities, the huge influx of population, which results in rapid formation of hutment dwellings
without proper sanitary and water facilities, develop into a health hazard. Sufficient water is not available
usually at such dwellings and the use of water from any source is resorted to, sometimes even gutter
water being used. It is not that the hutment dwellers are not aware of the hazards involved, but they
have no other alternative.
       There is no facility for drainage and the used water and sewage stand, encouraging breeding of
mosquitoes and flies. These pests carry and spread pathogens from sewage to nearby localities, thus
creating health problems. Exposed ready-to-eat foods sold in such localities may be contaminated by
the flies.
       Another difficulty experienced in cities with protected water supplies is the difficulty of maintaining
a positive pressure in all pipelines. In cities many of the pipelines have become very old and unless there
is a continuous flow of water into them with a positive pressure there is a possibility of seepage of
bacteria, from sewage into water pipes. With limited supply of water available, in many Indian cities, all
the pipes can never be holding water all the 24 hours. This is a problem, which does cause concern.
       The effluents from many industries, which are at present mostly discharged into rivers are another
source of contamination; this problem is assuming serious proportions. Many of these effluents use up
much of the oxygen from the water with the result that fish and other aquatic animals are unable to
survive.
       Foul smell emanates from such streams, due to anaerobic decomposition (putrefaction) of dead
fish, thus making the water unfit for human consumption.
Treatment of Water
      It is thus essential that water used for potable purposes be free from pathogenic bacteria. The
best precaution one can take is to prevent the source of water from contamination with sewage.

2. Source: India, Reference Manual; Ministry of Information, 1981.
Food Sanitation and Hygiene                                                                            249

      In villages this can be done by constructing cement sides to deep wells to prevent bacteria from
seeping through the soil and gaining entrance in the water. Well water which may be contaminated can
be purified by the addition of bleaching powder. A simple and inexpensive gadget using this principle
has been fabricated by the Central Public Health Engineering Research Institute. Bleaching powder on
reaction with water releases chlorine which is capable of killing pathogenic organisms. In villages
where there is no treated water, drinking water should preferably be boiled and then cooled. This would
destory all the pathogenic bacteria. Water used for cooking need not be boiled, as it would be boiled
anyway during cooking. Water used for washing, cleaning need not be boiled as long as it is not foul
smelling and does not contain any suspended impurities.




                                         Figure 22.2: Water filter.

       In cities and towns where it is necessary to supply a large population with water, effective
methods have to be used for the purification of water. The source of water is usually a lake in which
the water is allowed to stand. This results in most of the suspended impurities settling down. Further
the action of sunlight and the paucity of food results in the destruction of bacteria. In the next stage,
which may consist of a filtration through sand most of the bacteria are eliminated. As an added precaution,
water supplies to cities are chlorinated. This may either be done by the addition of bleaching powder, or
as is done in most of the cities, by the injection of liquid chlorine. To make sure that the bacteria which
may have entered into the pipelines through seepage when there is no positive pressure, additional
chlorination is resorted to at different locations during the transportation of water from the lake to city
reservoirs. This is understandable when it is realised that the source of water may be 60 to 70 km away
from the city. Water may be rendered potable by use of water filter in the home (Figure 22.2).
What you can do about pesticide residue
      Pesticide residue can pose a serious problem in the diet. There are certain precautions which you
can take to reduce dietary exposure to this hazard. These are:
250                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      1.   Thoroughly rinse and scrub fruits and vegetables. Peel them if appropriate.
      2.   Remove outer leaves of leafy vegetables, such as cabbage and lettuce.
      3.   Trim fat from meat, poultry and fish; discard oils and fats in broths and drippings.
      4.   Throw back the big fish—the little ones have less time to take up and concentrate pesticides
           and other harmful residues.

Food
      All vegetables and fruits either from bazar or grown in one’s own farm would have to be cleaned,
and prepared for either eating directly or cooking. The dirt or dust which we find on foods as we buy
them can be carrier of spores of microorganisms. Therefore, all exposed food must be washed with
clean water before use. Outer layers, skins of plant material contain thousands of microorganisms and
must be washed thoroughly before use. If any parts of fruits and vegetables are bruised these should be
trimmed to reduce contamination.
      The skin, hair, feathers, intestines of animals harbour a number of microorganisms. It is, therefore,
necessary to remove these, before animal products are prepared for human consumption.
Food Handling
       Food comes into contact with human hands during harvesting, storage, preparation and service.
It is important that food handlers be free from any communicable diseases—colds, any other respiratory
ailment, cuts or boils, as they may be responsible for transferring these to the food thereby spreading
the infection to persons consuming the food.
       Human hair, nasal discharge, skin can also be source of microorganisms. Therefore, persons
handling food, must wash hands with soap before starting preparation, and refrain from touching hair
or wiping nose during food preparation.
       Food sanitation is a way of life. It can never be overemphasised. A number of gastrointestinal
disorders, such as diarrhoea, cholera and communicable diseases such as typhoid, septic sore throat,
diphtheria, dysentery, etc., are communicated by use of contaminated water or food (Figure 22.3).
Therefore, it is very important that sanitary handling of food and water is religiously adhered to (Figure
22.4).




                     Figure 22.3: Spread of diseases through faecal contamination.
Food Sanitation and Hygiene                                                                           251




                                 Figure 22.4: Sanitary handling of food.

Food Contamination
    Food may be contaminated if the:
     1. Water used for washing or cleaning is not potable.
     2. Soil adhering to foods grown close to ground is not completely removed.
     3. Containers or utensils used for storage and preparation are not clean.
     4. Personnel handling food have unhygienic habits.
     5. Personnel handling food suffer from communicable diseases.

Equipment
      It is necessary that all equipment coming in contact with food be kept clean. This includes knives,
meat mincers, blenders, rolling pins, wooden boards, metal and porcelain dishes, utensils, etc. They
should be scrubbed, cleaned with detergent and water and then rinsed with potable water. It is a good
practice to see that such equipment are dipped in hot water at 80°C for at least 30 seconds or more and
then allowed to drain dry. This sanitary step is especially important during epidemics such as infective
hepatitis (infective jaundice), cholera, etc. Parts of blenders, mixers, etc., should be inspected after
cleaning to ensure that there is no food material left over. If allowed to remain they could allow harmful
microorganisms to grow and spoil the food. Equipment made of plastic and other such material which
cannot withstand high temperatures need not be given the dip in hot water but should be given other
treatments and then allowed to drain dry.
      In villages it is a common practice to scrub utensils and dishes with ash and then rinse them with
water. The utensils and dishes are then allowed to dry in the sun. The alkaline ash acts as a good agent
252                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


for killing any microorganisms adhering to the utensils and a sanitary effect is produced by drying in
the sun both because of heat and the ultraviolet rays.

Control of Insects and Rodents
      One of the common insects contaminating foods is the housefly. These have minute hair on their
legs and thus can be the carriers of harmful bacteria depending on where they come from. It is possible
that they may carry faecal matter or other such sources of pathogenic bacteria and deposit it on the
food.
      Another insect which can also be a source of contamination in the same way as the housefly is
the cockroach. These insects, which usually prefer darkness, have been known to cause diarrhoea and
dysentery.
      Apart from these two common ones, there are innumerable insects ranging from the larvae found
in wheat and rice to locusts, which can cause serious damage to food.
      Rodents, which include rats, mice and bandicoots, not only consume large quantities of food,
thus contributing to the overall shortage of food in the country, but may also be the carriers of diseases
such as plague.
      The presence of insects, insect fragments, rodent excreta and other matter of insect and rodent
origin (even though it may not necessarily be dangerous to health) is aesthetically resented by consumers.
Health authorities condemn such food as unfit for consumption because it indicates poor practices of
sanitation where the food was prepared.
      It is thus essential that preventive measures be taken to exclude the entry of insects and rodents
in the house, especially in the cooking and serving areas. This can be done by:
       (i) Keeping the prepared food in cupboards with wire-netting.
      (ii) Filling cracks, fissures in the walls and flooring which are usually the places where insects
             breed and multiply.
     (iii) Covering drains, holes, etc., with wire gauze so as to prevent the entry of rodents.
      Precautions such as these if taken in villages and small towns where people normally stay in
independent homes would certainly prevent the entry of insects and rodents. In large cities, however,
where each building may have many apartments, unless measures are taken by the whole community,
there is always a danger of insects and rodents travelling from one apartment to another.
      The control of insects and rodents can be carried out in several ways of which the most common
one practised in the home is spraying or dusting with an insecticide. Fumigation may be resolved to in
large godowns, factories, etc., as it destroys insects and rodents.
      Sprays or dustings make use of chlorinated hydrocarbons (such as DDT, TDE, aldrin, dieldrin,
etc.) and the organic phosphorus compounds (such as Parathion, Malathion, Systrex, etc.) as the
active ingredient for killing the insect. Baits in which chemicals may be mixed with food are also
successful in getting rid of pests. Examples of these are “Tygon” in which a chemical is mixed with
sugar and a home-made mixture of boric powder and bengalgram dal flour, which when ingested by
cockroaches results in their death. Warfrain may be mixed with food and used as a bait for the elimination
of rodents.
      It must be noted that insecticides are poisonous, and must be used in very small amounts only
where needed. If used indiscriminately these are likely to enter our bodies and harm us after a period of
time. It is important to store these out of reach of children and away from food, to prevent accidents.
Food Sanitation and Hygiene                                                                          253


Practical Rules for Good Sanitation
      1. Tie hair neatly before starting food preparation. Use hair net or cap if necessary. Wash hands
         thoroughly with soap and water before starting preparation.
      2. Wash fruits, vegetables, cereals and beans thoroughly before preparation with potable water.
         Boil milk in a clean container as soon as possible after receipt and keep covered. Bottles of
         milk need to be rinsed thoroughly with water and then washed with soap and water.
      3. Use potable water in food preparation.
      4. Boil water used for drinking or for preparation of cold beverages, if the purity of water is not
         guaranteed.
      5. Utensils and equipment used for preparation should be scrupulously cleaned.
      6. Cooked food should be stored covered, preferably in the container in which it is cooked.
      7. Left over foods such as rice, vegetables, should be stored either in a refrigerator kept in a
         pan of cold water. Reheating before use is advisable.

Study Questions
      1. What is potable water? List the sources of contamination of water and how to prevent such
         contamination.
      2. How does food get contaminated? List the steps to be taken to prevent contamination of
         food.
      3. List effective means of control of household pests.

Laboratory Work
      1.   Cleaning of work surfaces, storage space and floors.
      2.   Demonstration on cleaning of equipment.
      3.   Labelling of containers and their proper storage.
      4.   Use of proper apron, hair-net or head cover, etc.
      5.   Expose sterile nutrient agar to various contaminants and observe the microbial growth.
      6.   Show slides of microorganisms causing food infection.
      7.   Make visual charts to emphasise Rules of Sanitation.
      8.   Visit municipal quality control laboratory if possible.
      9.   Simple tests to detect adulterants in various foods.
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
PART - V
Diet Therapy
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                                                                               CHAPTER 23


     Adaptation of Normal Diet for Changing
                                            Needs

     Normal Diet
        Modification of Normal Diet
     Liquid and Soft Diets
         Mechanical Soft Diet
         Soft Diet
         Liquid Diets
         Full Fluid Diets
         Clear Fluid Diets
     Study Questions and Practical Work



Normal Diet
      Normal diet is modified to feed young children, elderly members and sick members of the family.
The planning of diet whether normal, soft or liquid has the same basic objective—to maintain, or
restore the good health of the person through a proper diet. The modifications are based on the changed
needs of the individual, due to age or sickness. Figure 23.1 depicts changes in consistency of diet to
suit varying needs.
      Normal Diet forms the basis of all modifications of diets for age and sickness; but due attention
must be paid to nutritional needs of the individual. Normal diet is planned according to the recommended
daily dietary intakes, which are designed to meet the needs of all healthy persons and may not meet the
needs of sick persons. The nutritional requirements depend on the activity, the increased or decreased
demands for certain nutrients, which need to be considered in planning the diet.




                              Figure 23.1: Changes in consistency of diet.
258                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     The plan given in Table 23.1 for a normal diet may be adapted to suit different cultural or socio-
economic circumstances.
     Modifications of Normal Diet: The normal diet may be modified to:
      1. Provide change in consistency, e.g., soft and fluid diets;
      2. Provide foods bland in flavour;
      3. Modify intervals of feeding;
      4. Increase or decrease energy content;
      5. Increase or decrease other nutrients, e.g., protein;
      6. Increase or decrease fibre.

Liquid and Soft Diets
      The type of modification relates to the condition and need of the individual concerned. The
selection of foods is made on the same principles as the normal diet, using the daily food guide.
      Mechanical Soft Diet: Many people, including infants, need soft diet because they have no
teeth. Therefore, the only change made is in the consistency of the foods served. No restriction is
placed on food selection. This diet is sometimes described as mechanically soft diet.
                                       Table 23.1: Normal Diet

      Food Group               Foods to be Included                         Amount
              1          Rice
                         Chapati/Roti
                         Upma/Shira/Pohe                           6 or more servings
                         Bread. etc.
             2.          Milk                                      2-3 Servings
                         Dal                                       2 or more servings
                         Egg/Fish/Meat, if acceptable              2 or more servings
            3(a)         Leafy vegetables                          1 or more servings
            3(b)         Citrus or other vitamin-C rich fruits     1 or more servings
             4.          Other vegetables, fruits and              2 or more servings
                         roots, tubers
             5.          Oil                                       15 g or more
                         Sugar/Butter/Ghee/Vanaspati               As required to meet energy needs

      The following changes in the normal diet will meet the needs of individuals without teeth:
       • Rice and other cereals to be served soft-cooked.
       • Chapati/roti/bread—soft breads are substituted for hard, crusty preparations.
       • Dal and whole pulses must be cooked thoroughly.
       • Eggs—boiled or scrambled.
       • Meat/fish should be ground or minced finely.
       • Cooked vegetables may be used.
Adaptation of Normal Diet for Changing Needs                                                            259

         • Most raw vegetables are omitted, except tomatoes, finely chopped cucumber, lettuce,
            coriander, and mint (pudina). Chutney may be acceptable.
         • Raw fruits, which are juicy and soft can be included—banana, mango (non-fibrous varieties),
            oranges, musambi, grape fruit, soft berries, jack fruit (soft variety), all melons, grapes, with
            soft skins, soft pear, peaches, apricots, plums (minus skins), etc.
         • Apples may be served after cooking or baking.
         • Tough skins, stones, fibres should be removed from fruits and vegetables, e.g., apple skin,
            potato skin, etc.
         • Nuts and dried fruits need to be finely ground, when used.
       Soft Diet: It is a step between the full liquid and the normal diet. It is served to persons suffering
from acute infections, gastrointestinal disturbances or persons recovering from surgery. The diet consists
of simple soft foods, which are easy to chew and easy to digest. Harsh fibre, fatty or highly spiced
foods are avoided. It is nutritionally adequate, when planned according to the Daily Food Guide. The
soft diet includes:
         • Soft cooked rice, soft chapati and bread—6 servings or more
         • Milk, dahi (curd), buttermilk, paneer, soft cheese—2-3 servings
         • Dals, well-cooked—2-3 servings
         • Eggs poached, boiled, trader ground meat, fish and poultry—2-3 servings
         • Vegetables and fruits made up of
              1. Green leafy vegetables cooked and strained—2-3 servings
              2. Citrus fruits or juice or mango (non-fibrous varieties)—2-3 servings
         • Other vegetables and fruits, not mentioned above, such as:
              1. Other vegetables—tender, chopped and cooked—2-3 servings
              2. Other fruits—banana or cooked fruits without skin or seeds—2-3 servings.
       Additional foods such as butter, soups, soft desserts (such as kheer/payasam) and more of the
above foods can be included to meet the nutritional needs.
       The following foods are avoided:
         • Legumes (whole).
         • Egg (fried).
         • Meat, tough, salted, smoked fish or meat.
         • Vegetables and fruits raw, except those mentioned above; strongly flavoured ones.
         • Bread and cereals coarse, with bran, whole-grain preparations and fatty recipes.
         • Soups—fatty or highly seasoned.
         • Fats—fried foods, e.g., potato chips.
         • Miscellaneous: hot spices, pickles, nuts, etc.
       Liquid Diets or full fluid diets are prepared for persons suffering from fevers, persons who have
just undergone an operation or whenever a person is unable to tolerate solid foods. The adequacy of
such a diet will depend on the types of liquids permitted.
       Full fluid diet is served to persons, who are very ill and cannot chew or swallow solid food. It
includes all foods, which are liquid at 37°C. To avoid difficulty in swallowing, fibrous foods and
irritating spices are not included in this diet. The period of use of this diet depends on the condition of
260                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

the patient. As the nutrient content is diluted, the interval between feeds is reduced and the number of
feeds is increased to six or more.
      The protein content of the diet can be increased by adding skimmed milk powder in the soups and
beverages. Cooked, mashed dal can be used to prepare soups. Strained, ground meat or fish can be
added to broths.
      The energy content of the diet can be increased by adding (a) cream to milk, (b) butter/oil to
cereal gruels and dal soups, (c) glucose to juices, milk, (d) using cream in desserts.
      The following foods can be included in the full fluid diet:
        • Milk—1 litre
        • Eggs—2 (in custard or in eggnog )
        • Dal, well-cooked—25–50 g
        • Meat/fish cooked and strained—25-50 g
        • Cereal strained—1/2 cup (100 g) cooked as gruel
        • Vegetables—1/4 cup cooked, strained or puree for soup
        • Fruit juices—1 cup, citrus and other strained juices
        • Tomato or vegetable juices—1/2 cup
        • Butter
        • Sugar
        • Kheer, icecream, gelatin dessert, custard
        • Soups—broth
        • Tea, coffee, soft drinks
        • Flavourings, salt.
      Clear fluid diet is given when a person is unable to tolerate food, due to nausea, vomiting, gas-
formation, diarrhoea, or extreme lack of appetite. This diet is given for a day or two, until the patient is
able to take a more liberal liquid diet.
      As the name indicates the diet consists of clear liquids such as tea with lemon and sugar, coffee,
cereal extracts (extract of puffed cereals also), strained fruit juices, carbonated beverages, dal extract,
fat-free broth, etc. The amount is restricted to 30 to 60 ml per hour in the beginning and gradually
increased. This diet replaces the fluids lost by the body, thus preventing dehydration.
      Recent trend is to help the patient to progress from clear liquid to liquid to soft to mechanically
soft to normal diet as quickly as possible. Therefore, the inadequacy of the first stage of diet may not
affect the patient’s health adversely, as he is encouraged to get through this stage in a day or two.

Study Questions
      1. (a) What are the modifications made in normal diet?
         (b) List the foods to be included in soft diet.
      2. What foods are included in liquid diet? Indicate the predominant nutrients supplied by each.

Practical Work
      Plan and prepare diets for person suffering from
      Diarrhoea; Dysentery; Fever; Constipation.
                                                                                CHAPTER 24

  Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic
                                          Nutrition


     Introduction
     Food Acceptance in Illness
     Illness Affects Nutrition
     Nutritional Assessment in the Clinical Setting
     Iatrogenic Malnutrition
     Planning Therapeutic Diets
     Therapeutic Diets
        Composition, Consistency and Mode of Feeding
     Types of Diets
        Normal Hospital Diet
        Liquid Diets: Clear-liquid and Full Liquid Diet
        Soft Diet: Pureed Diet, Soft Fiber–Restricted Diet
          Connective Tissue, Flavour, Beverages, Nutrient Content
     Tube Feeding: Composition, Osmolarity, Types of Formulas,
          Mode of Feeding, Home Tube-feeding,
          Parenteral Nutrition, Total Parenteral Nutrition
     Home Care of Patients



Introduction
      The best doctors in the world are:
      “Doctor Diet, Doctor Quiet and Doctor Merryman” – Jonathan Swift.
      Diet Therapy is use of appropriate foods as a tool in the recovery from illness. In most illnesses,
the patient’s diet complements the medical or surgical treatment. The rate of recovery thus is determined
by the patient’s acceptance and intake of the diet prescribed. In certain ailments such as obesity and
diabetes mellitus modified diet is the most important input to help the patient’s recovery.
262                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      All therapeutic diets are modifications of the normal diet made in order to meet the altered needs
resulting from disease. As you may have noted in Chapter 14, the normal diet is planned to meet the
recommended dietary allowances (RDA), using the basic five food groups.
      Therapeutic diet is planned to meet or exceed the dietary allowances of a normal person as the
aim of diet therapy is to maintain health and help the patient to regain nutritional wellbeing.
      In certain ailments it may be necessary to restrict intake of calories (as in weight reduction diets)
or sodium (as in heart ailment).

Food Acceptance in Illness
      Illness leads to poor food acceptance due to:
       (i) Reduced desire or interest in food due to lack of appetite, gastrointestinal disturbances or
           discomfort after eating.
      (ii) Reduced appetite due to inactivity.
     (iii) Reduced appetite due to some drugs.
      In addition a patient in hospital faces a number of stressors. These include:
       (i) Altered time of eating and rest as compared to home.
      (ii) A lot of questions are asked; some of these are very personal.
     (iii) Movements to various laboratories for investigations or tests.
     (iv) A lot of waiting for tests to be done.
      (v) Fear of tests and their results.
     (vi) Hospital staff, who monitor the patient, may intrude on privacy.
    (vii) Other patients in the ward or room may cause anxiety.
      To counteract these stressors, a relative, a nurse or a case manager is needed to monitor the
patient’s care.
      In this stressful situation, the only comfort for the patient may be food.

Illness Affects Nutrition
      The nutrient needs and their use in the body may be affected by illness. The patient does not have
appetite, may have pain and/or vomiting. This may result in insufficient food intake. Nutrient absorption
may be poor due to severe diarrhoea, which may lead to loss of weight, malnutrition and even dehydration.
      The patient may face problems such as poor appetite, too much or too little food served etc.
Therapeutic diets may be bland, less salty, poor in texture and choice. Food acceptance of modified
diets can be a problem. These problems need to be anticipated and resolved by discussion with the
patient.
      The patient may feel relief if the appetite is satisfied, meals are attractive, colourful and include
some well-prepared favourite foods.
      In fever, the metabolic rate is increased and so the need for all nutrients (calories, proteins,
vitamins) is increased. Nutrient utilization is adversely affected in metabolic diseases.
      The patient’s lack of movement (due to confinement to bed or wheelchair) for many days increases
loss of nitrogen and calcium from the body. These are some of the problems that need attention and
solution.
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                     263


Nutritional Assessment in the Clinical Setting
      Nutritional assessment is used to decide the nutritional status of the patient. Nutritional assessment
includes anthropometric, clinical, dietary and laboratory measurements.
      Anthropometric measurements include height, weight, BMI (body mass index), triceps skinfold
and sometimes other skinfolds.
      Body Mass Index (BMI), a value calculated from height-weight data, is an indicator of the body
fat content. Standards of BMI have been developed for use in judging the health status of the person.
(Table 24.1)
                                      BMI = Wt. in kg / Ht. in metre2

                             Table 24.1 BMI in Adults (Men and Women)

                           Adults                                        BMI

                          Normal                                         19-24

                          Obesity – Grade I                              25-29

                          Obesity – Grade II                             30-40

                          Obesity – Grade III                            > 40

      Skinfold measurements help to assess the energy reserves in the form of fat. An average of three
of these values are used to compare with a set of normal values.
      Midarm Circumference (MC) gives an indication of body protein reserves and helps to detect
protein malnutrition.
      Clinical Assessment includes examination of eyes, teeth, gums, tongue, skin and hair to observe
symptoms of nutritional deficiency. It is quick, but subjective and not specific.
      Dietary Assessment is an essential basis for dietary counselling. There are several methods
used, which include 24 hour recall, food frequency list, a food diary, diet history and observations at
meal times. These help in evaluation of the food intake to detect possible deficiencies.
      Laboratory Assessment involves whole blood, blood serum and blood plasma analysis; sometimes
urine analysis is done to determine the level or the excretion rate of the nutrients or their metabolites.
      Dietary Counselling is intended to produce a desirable change in the food behaviour. Preventive
health care, especially dietary care, can reduce the risks of patients developing chronic diseases. Its
success depends on the trust and active involvement of the patient.
      It has been observed that malnourished patients take longer to recover. Hence nutritional assessment
should be a routine part of all patients’ care.
      All patients do not need in-depth assessment. A simple method of clinical observation helps to
detect those at-risk of malnutrition. Only patients at risk need to undergo comprehensive nutritional
assessment.
      Nutrition history and clinical evaluation can help to identify individuals who are at risk nutritionally
(Table 24.2).
      When the nature, extent and cause of the problems are determined, on the basis of clinical
observations, a plan of nutritional care can be made.
264                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                    Table 24.2 Clinical Observations Suggesting Malnutrition

            1.   Recent loss of 10% or more of usual body weight.

            2.   Restricted oral intake of nutrients for 10 days or more (e.g. clear liquid diet or IV
                 infusions of simple solutions only)

            3.   Protracted nutrient losses as a result of
                 (a) Nausea, vomiting, diarrhoea, malabsorption syndromes
                 (b) Surgical removal of portions of gastrointestinal tract.
                 (c) Draining fluids, abscesses, wounds, burns.
                 (d) Renal dialysis

            4.   Increased metabolic needs due to
                 (a) Fever, (b) Recent surgery or trauma, (c) Extensive burns, infections

            5.   Chronic disease or impaired function of a major organ system.

            6.   Use of drugs with antinutrient properties

            7.   Excessive intake of alcohol

            8.   Faddism and other personal problems


Iatrogenic Malnutrition
      Patients who are hospitalised for 2 weeks or longer are at risk of developing iatrogenic (doctor
or hospital induced) malnutrition due to some of the factors mentioned above. These include insufficient
food (hence nutrient) intake, stress, blood loss due to tests and surgery. For such patients, as also
others, nutritional assessment and nutritional care are imperative.

Planning of Therapeutic Diets
      The energy and protein needs need to be determined to ensure proper nutritional care of a
malnourished patient.
      Energy Needs : The energy intake has to meet the basal plus activity needs of the patient, taking
into account the patient’s need for – repletion, maintenance or weight loss. The resting energy
expenditure (REE) can be measured with a portable equipment, which measures volumes of oxygen
(VO 2) consumed and carbon dioxide expired (VCO2). The REE is increased in patient suffering from
burns, fevers, infection, fractures, trauma etc. and lowered in malnutrition.
      The resting energy expenditure (REE) can also be determined using the classic Harris-Benedict
equation derived from indirect calorimetry measurements, using the weight, height and age of the
patient.
Harris-Benedict Equation
       Women: REE ( kcal ) = 655.1 + 9.56W + 1.85H - 4.68A
       Men: REE ( kcal) = 66.5 + 13.75W + 5.0H - 6.78A
       where A = Age in years, W = Weight in kgs, H = Height in cms
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                         265

      Protein Needs: Loss of nitrogen is increased by stress. If the losses in urine are measured, the
protein intake can be increased to make up for the loss. When the loss is unknown, protein intake can
be proportional to energy intake, as indicated below:
      Calorie : Nitrogen ratio in Severe stress is — 150 : 1 to 100 : 1
      For example, if a stressed patient needs 2400 kcalories, his N-need is–
      2400 kcal = N(g) × 150 = 16.0 g N per day
      Protein Needs = 16.0 × 6.25 = 100g per day

Therapeutic Diets
      Food is an integral part of patient care and is a major contributor in his/her recovery. Therefore,
careful selection of foods, their preparation and ensuring that these are consumed by the patient is an
important part of the therapy. The medical personnel are responsible for diagnosis and indicating the
kind of modifications to be made in the normal diet in view of the condition of the patient. The diet
section staff use this information to plan the patient’s diet.
      There are three aspects of the diets prescribed. The first refers to the composition of the diet.
Thus it indicates modification in the components of the diet. For example, low calorie diet, indicates
that the energy content of the diet is reduced. However, it is important to include a specific amount
intended to guide the user ( such as 1200 or 1500 calorie diet).
      Second aspect refers to the consistency of the diet. Thus you have normal diet, liquid diet
(further classified into clear–liquid, full-liquid diet), soft diet, soft fiber-restricted diet, pureed diet, etc.
      Thirdly, it is important to indicate the manner and route of feeding the diet, such as by mouth,
by nasogastric tube, gastrostomy tube etc., depending on the condition of the patient.

Types of Diets
Normal Hospital Diet
      Normal diet is the most commonly used diet in the hospitals. It plays a very important part in the
patient’s recovery. It aims to meet the recommended dietary allowances of nutrients through a planned
diet. There are no restrictions involved in food planning, but the food plan is balanced to avoid over- or
under-nutrition. In the hospitals, there is choice of menu based on normal food acceptance patterns of
the patients. Thus in India, the hospitals serve vegetarian and non-vegetarian diet. There may be some
choice of foods in the menu, which helps to retain a feeling of control in the patient. Table 23.1 gives
foods included in the normal diet.
Modifications of Normal Diet
      The normal diet is modified to form various diets according to the needs of the patient. These
include various liquid and soft diets, which have been discussed in chapter 23.
      Liquid Diets are further divided into Clear-liquid Diet and Full-liquid Diet. The details of
foods included in liquid diets are given in Chapter 23.
      Clear-liquid Diet or Clear-fluid Diet includes drinks such as tea, coffee, clear fruit juices,
coconut water, sherbets, extracts of dal, rice, popped cereals, fat-free broth, carbonated drinks. Milk
is not included, as it is not a clear liquid. Feeds are offered in small portions of about 20-25 ml every
hour or two and the volume is increased gradually as the condition of the patient improves.
266                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     Liquid diet helps to maintain liquid and electrolyte balance, relieve thirst and stimulate the digestion
system to function, after an operation or disturbance in the system due to infection. If the fluids are
chosen well, the diet can provide 200-500 kcal, some sodium, potassium and ascorbic acid. It does not
meet the requirement of most nutrients and is given only for a day or two during a transient phase
before moving on to soft and then full diet.
     A clear-liquid diet is given :
     (a) for a patient suffering from nausea, vomiting or loss of appetite (anorexia).
     (b) during acute stage of diarrhea
     (c) post-operative first stage,
     (d) after tube or parenteral feeding before resuming oral feeding.
      Full-liquid Diet: In full liquid diet, foods included are –liquids and foods which are liquid at body
temperature. It can provide adequate nutrition, with the exception of iron. As the nutrient-density is not
high, six or more feedings are given. Skim milk powder is added to increase the protein content of the
diet. This increases the lactose content of the diet and therefore, it should not be given to persons with
low lactase activity. This diet has high calcium and fat content and is low in fiber. The foods which can
be included in full-liquid diet are listed in Chapter 23.
                    Table 24.3 Daily Food Allowances for the Full Liquid Diet


                     Daily Food Plan                                      Description

             I Cereal Group                                One half cup strained, cooked cereal
             1 or more servings                            contains about 80 calories, 2g protein,
                                                           iron and the B complex vitamins.
                                                           Combine with milk in gruels and soups.
             II Protein Group
             Milk
              1 ¼ liter fluid cow’s milk                   One and quarter liter fluid cow’s milk
                                                           contains about 40g protein and 820
                                                           calories, 2.5g calcium, day’s need of
                                                           vitamin A and B vitamins.
             ¼ C skimmed milk powder (SMP)                 If ¼ C skimmed milk powder is added to
                                                           cow’s milk, about 8g protein and 80
                                                           calories will be added. This can be used
                                                           in beverages, gruels, eggnog, custard,
                                                           ice cream and kheer.
             Dal - 50 g                                    Dal – 50 g, cooked and diluted contains
                                                           11g protein and 170 calories. It is
                                                           valuable source of iron and vitamin B
                                                           complex.
             Eggs - 2 nos                                  Two eggs contain 12 g protein and 170
                                                           calories. It is a valuable source of iron,
                                                           vitamin A and B complex. It can be
                                                           served as eggnog, egg custard or egg
                                                           flip.
                                                                                                    (Contd...)
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                     267


                     Daily Food Plan                                      Description

             Meat                                          Meat 30g, served as thick broth,
                                                           contains about 6g protein and 75
                                                           calories.
                                                           Liver is an excellent source of iron,
                                                           vitamin A and B complex. It can be
                                                           served combined with broth as soup.
                                                           Dal, egg and meat may be interchanged.
             III & IV Vegetable and Fruits Group           The puree or juice of spinach, carrots,
                                                           tomato, french beans may be used to
                                                           serve as soups. Normally mild-flavoured
                                                           vegetables are served. Other vegetable
                                                           purees or juices may be served if
                                                           accepted by the patient. Calories from
                                                           these are negligible.
                                                           Amla, citrus ( musumbi, orange etc.) and
                                                           tomato and papaya juice or puree
                                                           provide an important source of vitamin
                                                           C. One cup of citrus juices provides 80
                                                           calories.1 C tomato juice provides less
                                                           than 40 calories.
             V Fats and Sweets                             Eight teaspoons sugar contributes
             6 teaspoons, butter, ghee, oil.               about 160 to 200 calories and serve as
             8 to 10 teaspoons sugar                       sweeteners for eggnog, gruel, tea,
                                                           coffee, cocoa.
                                                           Six teaspoons of butter, ghee, oil
                                                           provide about 250 to 270 calories. These
                                                           serve as flavorings for soups, gruels and
                                                           desserts.


       A daily food plan for full-liquid diet is indicated in Table 24.3. Food allowances and sample menu
for full-liquid diet for ovo-lact-vegetaranians is presented in Table 24.4.
       Full-liquid diet is prescribed for patients: (i) post-operatively after clear-liquid diet phase,
(ii) in acute infections of short duration, (iii) in acute gastrointestinal upset, after clear-liquid diet
phase, and (iv) in situations when patient is unable to chew food.
       Soft Diet: Soft diet is used after full-liquid diet and before moving on to a normal diet. It is
nutritionally adequate. Foods included are those, which are easy to mix with saliva, swallow and digest.
Exclude foods, which contain harsh fiber, strong flavours and too much fat. Food allowances for soft
diet are given in Table 24.5. The calories and protein content of soft (low fiber) diet is given in
Table 24.6.
       Soft diets include several variations such as mechanically soft diet, pureed diet and fiber-restricted
soft diet.
268                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                Table 24.4 Food Allowances & Sample Menu for Full Liquid Diet

                                           (1875 kcal, 70g protein)

      Food Group           Foods                  Amount                  Menu Plan

       I                Cereal, strained             25g          Breakfast- Musumbi juice
       II               Milk                        200g          Strained cereal (rava) with
                        SMP                          25g          butter, hot milk and sugar
                        Eggs 2 nos.                 100g          Coffee with milk and sugar
       III              Spinach                     150g          Mid-morning
                        Beans (strained)             50g          Egg custard (soft)
                        Carrots                      75g          Musumbi juice
                        Tomatoes                     75g          Lunch
       IV               Musumbi 2 nos.              250g          Dal – spinach soup
                        Papaya                      100g          Tomato juice
                        Watermelon                  100g          Ice-cream, vanilla
       V                Sugar                        50g          Milk
                        Ghee, Butter                 30g          Mid-afternoon: Papaya
                                                                  milk shake, watermelon
                                                                  Dinner
                                                                  Beans – dal soup
                                                                  Egg nog
                                                                  Carrot kheer
                                                                  Night: High protein, High calorie
                                                                  Beverage: Milk +SMP+Sugar+flavour

        Mechanically Soft Diet: In this diet the modification of normal diet is in texture only. The
method of preparation or the seasonings used are not restricted. This is also called Dental Soft Diet,
as it is prescribed for those who cannot chew, due to absence or removal of teeth or ill-fitting dentures.
        Pureed Diets: Pureed diets include foods, which are smooth, soft and need hardly any chewing.
These are good for patients who have difficulty in swallowing. All foods (except those that are already
soft or smooth) are blended or pureed in a mixer. Liquids are added to get the consistency needed by
the patient. To increase calories, fat and/or sugars are added.
        Soft Fiber-Restricted Diet: Indigestible carbohydrates are excluded from this diet. Indigestible
fibers include those which make up cell wall of plants (such as cellulose, hemicellulose, lignin, pectic
substances, gums and mucin). The amount of indigestible carbohydrates in the diet can be reduced by
using:
       (a) refined cereals and breads
       (b) immature vegetables
        (c) fruits without skins and seeds and
       (d) cooked vegetables and fruits
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                         269

                                    Table 24.5 Food Allowances for Soft Diet


               I.              Cereal servings 6 to 12 - Soft chapati, mashed bhakri/roti, bread, biscuits
                               are included but not crackers and hard breads. Idli, k h a n d w a ,
                               khandpoli, ragi balls, sandane, etc., are included to provide the servings
                               needed

               II.             Dal 2S, Milk 2S, Eggs 1S, Meat-fish-poultry – 1S

               III and IV      Vegetables and fruits 3 to 4 servings
                               Vegetables cooked to soft texture, and can be cut, grated or diced, e.g.
                               finely cut tomatoes, lettuce, etc.
                               Soft fruits such as banana, musumbi or orange sections, grapes, cut
                               pear, apple, melons, berries can be eaten raw. All canned and frozen
                               fruits are permitted.

               V               Sugars, Fats and Oils: All desserts from normal diet which are easily
                               assimilated by patients are allowed such as kheer, payasam, puran poli,
                               kaju barfi, shira, rasgulla, gulab-jam, cakes, puddings, etc.; avoid those
                               containing nuts.

                     Table 24.6 Calories and Protein Content of Soft Low-Fiber Diet

       Food Group                   Food                  Amt.                 Cal.               Prot
           I                Bread 9s                      180g                  450                 14
                            Cereal, refined                20g                   70                  2
           II               Milk,whole cow’s             1 litre                670                 32
                            S.M.P                          50g                  180                 19
                            Dal, mung                      50g                  170                 12
                            Eggs 2 nos.(1)                100g                  170                 13
          III               Vegetables, leafy
                              Spinach                     100g                   30                   2
                            Fruit juice, musumbi          120g                   50                   1
          IV                Vegetables-other
                              French beans, cooked        100g                   30                   2
                              Potato cooked               100g                  100                   2
                              Fruit other
                              Cooked apple                100g                   60                 —
          Total                                                                2000                 99
          V                 Fat (2)+ Oil                   20g                  180                 —
                            Sugar                          30g                  120                 —
                            Total                                              2300                 99

     (1) Part of egg and dal may be substituted with fish, meat or poultry.
     (2) 10g butter.
270                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      While cooking, both peptic substances and cellulose are disintegrated, hence cooked vegetables
and fruits are used. To reduce indigestible carbohydrates, pureed vegetables and fruits or only the juice
of vegetables and fruits is used.
      Recent trend is a more liberal one as patients prefer and are happier with soft cooked immature
vegetables than with pureed ones. Use of a wider variety of fruits and vegetables, including some raw
fruits is the trend now. For example, peeled apples, pears, peaches, apricots and bananas are often
recommended to be used.
      A description of the daily food allowances and sample menu for soft fiber-restricted diet is
presented in Table 24.7. Appropriate adaptations can be made in this plan can be made to meet individual
requirements
      Some of the aspects that affect food acceptability include connective tissue, strong flavour and
the amount of stimulant present.
            Table 24.7 Food Allowances and Sample Menu for Soft Fiber-Restricted Diet

                              Food Allowances                                 Sample Menu
       I.        Cereal foods: Well-cooked, soft rice, chapati, Idli,         Breakfast
                 porridge (rawa), kheer, bread, bhakari, Senvaya,             Rawa porridge
                 noodles, macaroni, spaghetti                                 Toast/chapati + butter
                 II Dal, well-cooked, like varan, soup                        Egg, scrambled
                 Milk, cow’s, curd, buttermilk, soft cheese                   Milk, sugar
                 Eggs- All preparations, except fried                         Tea/coffee + milk + sugar
                 Meat- fish- poultry – very tender, minced or
                                                                              Lunch
                 ground, baked, roasted or stewed
                                                                              Rice
       III       Vegetables: tender greens, cooked and blended                Chapati
       IV        If not tender, strained cooked vegetables, cooked            Dal
                 tender beets, carrots, peas, pumpkin, squash and Other       Vegetable
                 gourds, without seeds and skin                               Salad,
                 Fruits: raw: banana, papaya, citrus fruits without           Dahi
                 membrane, chiku, water melon, mango Cooked apples.
                                                                              Supper
                 Pears, peaches, apricots – all without skins; all juices
                                                                              Similar to lunch
       V         Sugars: syrup, honey, jelly, sugar candy (without nuts
                 and fruits), molasses. Use in moderation
                 Fats: cream, butter, ghee, vegetable oils. Use in
                 moderation
                 In addition one can include –
                 Beverages – all,
                 Desserts : mithai without nuts and dry fruits, kheer –
                 rice, rawa, shenvaya etc. Plain cakes, biscuits, custard,
                 ice-cream, sherbet, puddings
                 Miscellaneous: salt, seasonings & spices in moderation

      Connective Tissue: The texture of meat, tender or less tender is mainly decided by the amount
of connective tissue present. The amount of connective tissue in meat depends on the age of the animal
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                    271

and how much the muscle is exercised. The acceptance of meat preparations can be improved by
cooking. Meat may be made tender by using moist heat and lower temperature cookery.
       Flavour – Strong flavoured vegetables such as onions, leeks, radishes, dried beans and cabbage
family vegetables ( brussel sprouts, cauliflower, broccoli, turnips) are normally omitted. But there is
individual variation in patients’ acceptance of these. Hence the individual patient’s preference needs to
be considered in this matter.
       The effects of spices on the digestive system have been studied. It is found that cinnamon,
allspice, thyme, sage, mace, paprika and caraway, used to flavour foods, do not have harmful effect.
But black pepper, chilli pepper, cloves, mustard seed and perhaps nutmeg are considered gastric irritants
and best avoided.
       Beverages: Both tea and coffee are stimulating beverages. When these are used in the diet, one
needs to know how to prepare these to avoid undesirable side effects on the other components.
       A mild cup of tea (from ½ tsp dried leaves) contains about 0.05g caffeine, but quick infusion
extracts most of the caffeine, but not the tannins. As tannins precipitate proteins, a quick infusion is
recommended for use in the diet.
       Coffee contains an average of 1.25% caffeine. A cup of strong coffee contains about 0.1g of
caffeine. Besides caffeine, coffee contains chlorogenic acid, which differs from tannins in that it does
not precipitate proteins and is not astringent. Cocoa contains 31% carbohydrate, 9% protein and 10%
fat. It contains about 1.5% theobromine and a trace of caffeine, both being stimulants.
       Nutrient Content: In the past, it was common practice to put more emphasis on “foods to
avoid” and less on “foods to eat”. It led to this group of diets being one of the hazards of hospitalization,
resulting in nutritional deficiency and delay in recovery. Such deficiency can be avoided by proper
selection and use of correct amount of foods in the diet.
       Foods from the first four groups may be used in amounts enough to meet or exceed RDAs. This
is very important for persons, who have been ill for sometime, and may have suffered due to undue
dietary restrictions. In addition, the disease itself may increase nutritional needs to ensure healing of
tissue or to make up for poor absorption. Such extra needs would justify increased intake of foods
from all the food groups. For example, if this diet is used to reduce gastric acidity, additional amounts
of protein containing foods such as milk need to be taken. The protein content of milk can be increased
by addition of skimmed milk powder to it. The number of meals may be increased to six or more
feedings per day, to buffer the acid produced in the stomach.
       The amount of protein foods, citrus juice and other foods need to be increased to exceed the
amounts suggested for a normal individual. As personal needs vary, special adaptations can be made to
suit the person.
       A description of the daily food allowances and sample menu pattern is presented in table 24.7.
Appropriate adaptations can be made in this plan to meet individual requirements.

Tube Feeding
      If a patient whose gastrointestinal tract is working, cannot take sufficient food orally, tube feeding
is resorted to. Tube feeding is given in the following conditions –
       (i) Babies who have low birth weight and cannot suck
      (ii) Those who are undernourished and cannot take or retain food taken orally
     (iii) Persistent anorexia patients, who need forced feeding
272                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       (iv)
          After certain types of surgery
        (v)
          Patients with severe malabsorption
       (vi)
          Patients who cannot absorb or digest food
      (vii)
          Semiconscious or unconscious patients or any other condition which prevents intake of
          sufficient food.
     Since the feed must be formulated to meet the nutritional needs of the patient, it is also called
formula feed. It is important that the formula should be such that it is well tolerated. Many types of
formulas can be made or purchased to serve the needs of the patient. The foods fed by tube may be :
      (i) Natural liquid foods
     (ii) Raw or cooked foods blended to liquid form, or
    (iii) Commercially made special formulated diets.

Composition
       The form of proteins in the formula can be intact proteins (milk, egg ) or protein hydrolysates
containing peptides and amino acids. When the patient has normal enzymatic digestive function
(absorption) intact proteins are included in the formula. But if there is severe lack of enzyme or
malabsorption, protein hydrolysates are used in the formula.
       Carbohydrate is in the form of polymers of glucose, which are easily broken and absorbed.
Starch or disaccharides (sucrose or lactose0 may also be used. Lactose is avoided in many ready-made
formulas because in some problems of absorption, lactose is not tolerated.
       Fats used in the formulas are vegetable oils, butter, lecithin, mono- and diglycerides and medium
chain triglycerides (MCT). Formulas are fortified with vitamins and minerals to ensure adequate nutrition.
       Formulas normally provide 1kcal/ml. Formulas are likely to be low in fiber, unless enriched with
fiber.
Osmolality
      The number and size of particles per kg of water is called Osmolality This is an important factor
in deciding patient tolerance. Isotonic formulas as the word indicates, have the same osmolality as
body fluids and are well tolerated. Hyper-osmoler formulas (with higher osmolality) may cause rapid
movement of fluid and electrolytes across the cell wall, if these are introduced in the intestine.
      Any formula which has a high level of electrolytes has high osmolality. Thus glucose and sucrose
have higher osmolality than complex carbohydrates; free amino acids have higher osmolality than
intact proteins; fat has little effect. It is good to remember that carbohydrates have the greatest influence
on osmolality, because they are digested very rapidly.
Types of Formulas
      Names of formulas indicate their components and their nutritional make-up. Thus Balanced
Complete Formulas are made from ordinary foods or baby foods by blending these. These can be
made at home or in hospital.
      A milk-based formula is prepared from cow’s, toned or skim milk with addition of pasteurised
eggs, a source of carbohydrate and supplements of vitamins.
      Lactose-free formulas are made for lactose-sensitive patients.
      Speciality formulas are made for specific conditions, with the needed adjustments in nutrient
Principles of Diet Therapy and Therapeutic Nutrition                                                273

content. For example, high fat and low carbohydrate formulas are made for pulmonary conditions; for
phenylketonuria, a formula low or devoid of phenylalanine is given. In trauma or liver disease, a formula
low in aromatic amino acids and high in branched chain amino acids is given.
      The mode of administration of formula is decided taking patient’s condition and the period for
which tube feed is to be given. For short term feeding nasogastric tube is used.
      When there is injury to the esophagus or for long term tube feeding, a gastrostomy tube may be
surgically inserted into the stomach. This route is not suitable for patients with unchecked vomiting or
where gastric emptying is disturbed. A jejunostomy tube may be used when the stomach must be
bypassed.
      The feeding can be continuous or intermittent. Intermittent feeding permits patient to move about.
      Like all other diets, diluted formulas are fed in the beginning and gradually concentration is
increased to full strength. The rate of feeding is begun slowly and then increased gradually. This
decreases the possibility of diarrhea. The patient’s bed (head side) is raised while feeding, to reduce
chance of air block.
Home Tube Feeding
      Long term tube feeding can be given at home, with guidance from the health care team. The care-
provider needs to be given instructions about how to maintain sanitation and hygiene in handling feeds
and the equipment used.

Parenteral Nutrition
      In parenteral feeding, the nutrient preparations are given directly into a vein. When a patient is
likely to be dehydrated and needs quick reversal of the condition, a 5% dextrose solution in water
(DSW) is usually given by a peripheral vein (also known as IV drip) to provide fluids and some energy
(calories). Electrolyte solutions can also be given by this mode. In some conditions the higher dextrose
concentrations with amino acids and lipids are given.

Total Parenteral Nutrition (TPN)
      TPN is used only when it is not possible to use enteral route and the patient is hypermetabolic or
debilitated. Before giving TPN, a thorough nutritional and metabolic assessment of the patient is done.
The blood levels of various nutrients are monitored frequently during TPN and the solution adjusted, if
needed.
      Composition of Solutions: Crystalline amino acids are used to meet protein needs, so that the
composition can be controlled to meet patient’s needs. Dextrose solutions (hypertonic) provide
carbohydrates as energy source and ensure amino acid sparing action. For patients with lung problems,
high dextrose load causes difficulty in breathing. For such patients part of the carbohydrate is replaced
with fat, to prevent this problem.
      Emulsions of safflower or soy oil are given separately, to meet part of the energy needs and to
provide essential fatty acids.. As lipid emulsions are isotonic, these are given by central or peripheral
vein. Other nutrients (vitamins, minerals and other electrolytes) are given in solution or by injection.
      TPN solutions being hypertonic are introduced into a large central vein where the solution gets
diluted quickly in the high rate of blood flow.
      The patient should be helped to return to oral feeding as soon as feasible, as TPN is expensive and
can lead to a number of complications, if not given properly.
274                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Home Care of Patients
      The family could be guided to take care of the patient’s nutrition at home. Thus over 25 per cent
of nursing home residents could be taken care of at home. There is a need to set up home health care
services to reduce the need for institutional care.

Study Questions
      1. List the problems which affect food acceptance in illness
      2. Write notes on anthropometric measurements, iatrogenic malnutrition and three aspects of
         therapeutic diets.
      3. List foods which can be included in soft-fibre-restricted diet.
      4. When is tube feeding given?
      5. Write short notes on: osmolarity, parenteral feeding.
                                                                                CHAPTER 25


       Nutrition in Infections, Fever and Lung
                                         Diseases


     Introduction
     Infections
     Fever; Diet
     Tuberculosis: Body’s Metabolic Response, Diet
     Asthma, Chronic Bronchitis and Emphysema
     Nutritional Status, Treatment, Diet Therapy, Plan of Mealtimes



Introduction
      The invasion of the body by a pathogen results in infections, fever, lung and other diseases. The
nutritional needs of the body are increased to resist the pathogen, to recoup the losses incurred
metabolically and rebuild the cells damaged by the invader. Hence a high protein diet is indicated.

Infections
       Infection occurs when a pathogen gains entry into the body in sufficient numbers or multiplies in
the body and causes injury at a particular site. Depending on where the pathogen attacks, different
types of illnesses develop. If a pathogen enters through the nose or mouth, and multiplies in that region,
ailments of throat or bronchi occur. If pathogens enter the lungs, it can injure them. If pathogens are
swallowed with water, milk or food, gastrointestinal symptoms such as nausea, vomiting, cramps and
diarrhea frequently result. If the pathogens enter through cut skin, infections such as boils, skin ulcers
or other inflammations occur.
       The severity of the infection depends on the number of pathogens in the body and the body’s
ability to fight the infection. The ability of the body to resist infection is called immunity. Natural
immunity is the sum-total of the defenses in the body which enables the body to resist infection under
normal conditions. These defenses include –
         • intact skin and mucous membranes, which bar entrance of microorganisms
         • tissue fluids and blood, which contain cells and other substances which engulf and destroy
            foreign objects, and
276                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

        • the normally harmless population of bacteria and viruses found in the body, which prevent
            the growth of harmful bacteria and viruses.
      All these processes of normal immunity depend on proper nutrition, physical fitness and
environmental conditions. When this natural immunity is depressed by poor nutritional status and other
conditions, a person may develop infections. If the person is in poor nutritional state, an attack of
common infectious diseases can endanger life itself.
      A patient who is in poor nutritional status needs nutrient supplements.
      In severe infections, nutritional status is affected in an adverse manner. Thus the food intake and
absorption are reduced, while nutrient excretion is increased, metabolic rate also increases. Nutrients
are diverted to minimize effect of infection and resist damage to tissues. Higher nutrient intake must be
planned to ensure tissue repair and to make up for excretory losses.
      Infection involves protein breakdown and hence there is an increased need for dietary proteins.
The first goal is to identify and destroy the pathogen causing infection. The antibiotics, which are given
to control the infection, may cause gastrointestinal disturbances which need to be taken into account
in the diet management.

Fever
      Fever often accompanies infection. The patient may have chills due to fever and may complain of
feeling cold. But all fevers are not a result of infection. All elevations in body temperature are not fever.
For example, there is elevation of body temperature in heat stroke, as the body is unable to eliminate
heat.
      Infection affects protein catabolism (breakdown), often decreases food intake and increases
nutrient loss through vomiting and/or diarrhea. Enteric(intestinal) infections, as in typhoid, interfere
with absorption and reduce nutrient utilization. Fever, which often accompanies infection, increases
energy needs of the body (about 7% per degree Fahrenheit) above normal temperature.
      Fever may be acute and of short duration as in colds, intermittent as in malaria or chronic as in
tuberculosis.
      Diet: The dietary treatment varies with the kind of fever and its duration. When fever is acute and
of short duration, the most important aspect is to feed sufficient fluids and electrolytes to make up for
the losses from the body. As appetite is usually poor, frequent small feeds of liquid and soft foods need
to be given to ensure adequate intake. As the condition improves, the size of the feed is increased to
meet nutritional needs.
      The critical problem is protein breakdown, which occurs in infection. A high protein, high calorie
diet is prescribed (Table 25.1). Liquid and soft foods need to be fed often to ensure sufficient food
intake as appetite is poor. Food allowances for such a diet are indicated in table 25.2.
      The drugs given (antipyretics) help to bring the temperature to normal. Most of the drugs contain
ingredients to relieve pain also. The medication is taken with food to minimise gastric irritation.

Tuberculosis
      In India, tuberculosis is a major cause of illness and death. According to one estimate, one in four
Indians is infected by T.B.
Nutrition in Infections, Fever and Lung Diseases                                                      277

                              Table 25.1 High Protein High Calorie Diet

               Protein 75g; Kcal 2,500                             Protein 110g; Kcal 3,000

    Food          Amt/Serving    Protein     Kcal       Food              Amt/Serving Protein     Kcal
 Milk,toned           800ml          26        535      Milk,toned         1000ml         32       670
 Egg                   1 no           6            75   Egg                   1 no            6     75
 Cheese/                2S            9        133      Cheese/                4S         18       265
 Paneer/meat                                            Paneer/meat
 Dal                    2S           11        170      Dal                    3S         17       255
 Cereals,               6S           15        510      Cereals,              12 S        30      1,020
 Breads                                                 Breads
 Vegetables           3-4 S           5        100      Vegetables           3-4 S            5    100
 Fruits                 3 S           1        180      Fruits                 3S             1    100
 Ghee                   9S            0        405      Ghee                   5S             0    225
 Butter/oil                                             Butter/oil
 Sugar                 10 S           0        200      Sugar                  5S             0    100
 Jam etc.                                               Jam etc
 Total                               75      2,508      Total                            110      2,990


       Tuberculosis is caused by the bacteria Mycobacterium tuberculosis. It is transmitted through the
cough or sneeze of an infected person, when it gets sprayed into the air. Most people who breathe in
the bacteria do not get infected. In those who do not get infected even after inhaling the bacteria, the
microorganisms may remain dormant as their immune system triggers activation of macrophages,
which engulf the bacteria. About 10 per cent of those infected develop tuberculosis some time in their
life, when the natural immunity is lowered.
       In tuberculosis, lungs are the most frequently affected part, but other organs may be attacked
sometimes. Tuberculosis ( T.B. ) is accompanied by cough, sneezing, fever and tissue wastage. In
acute form, the fever is high and the symptoms are similar to pneumonia. Low grade fever is typical of
the chronic form.
       Body’s Metabolic Response: Ability to utilise fat is reduced, hence muscle protein losses are
increased. As available nitrogen is used to synthesize immune bodies, considerable protein wasting
occurs with loss of body weight.
       Diet: A high protein, high calorie diet is prescribed. It must provide sufficient energy i.e. about
2500-3000 calories and 75-100g protein (Table 25.2). A sample menu and foods included are given in
table 25.3. In addition, if there has been lung haemorrhage, iron supplement with large intake of vitamin
C is needed. As carotenes are not utilised well, preformed vitamin A must be included in the diet. In
addition, vitamin A and vitamin B6 supplements must also be given.
       Isoniazid, a drug, which is prescribed for T.B., is a Vitamin B6 antagonist. Hence vitamin B6
supplements must be given to avoid its deficiency.
278                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                   Table 25.2 Food Allowances for High Calorie, High Protein Diet
                              Protein – 75 to 110g and Kcal 2,500 to 3,100

             Group                       Foods                        No. of Servings, amount
             I                 Cereals, breads                        6 – 12 S (150 – 300g)
             II.               Milk, toned/cow’s                      800 – 1000ml
                               Egg                                    1 no
                               SMP/Cheese/Paneer/Meat                 50 – 100g
                               Dal                                    2 – 3 S (50 – 75g)
             III and IV        Vegetables                             3–4S
                                                                      1 S leafy vegetable
                                                                      1 S raw (salad)
                                                                      2 S other + root vegetable
                               Fruits                                 3 – one of these citrus
             V                 Ghee, Butter, Oil                      5 – 10 S
                               Sugar, jam, murabbas,                  10 S
                               Desserts such as kheer, pudding,
                               Custard, shreekhand etc.


              Table 25.3 A Sample Menu– Foods Included in 80-100g Protein Diet

                      Breakfast                                   Lunch
                      Orange                                      Rice
                      Eggs, scrambled                             Chapati
                      Milk toned – 1 C                            Dal
                      Bread/toast                                 Usal
                      Butter                                      Vegetable, beans
                      Murabba                                           “ potato
                      Tea with milk, sugar                        Salad – tomato
                                                                  Dahi ½ C
                      Mid morning                                 Dinner
                      1 C lassi & banana                          Bhakari
                      Afternoon pm Snack                          Rice
                      Milk 1 C                                    Dal
                      Egg sandwich                                L. vegetable
                      Tea                                         Papad
                                                                  Fruit Salad

      The drugs used in treatment may have adverse reactions, which need to be treated promptly. One
of the problems in the control of tuberculosis is the fact that patients tend to neglect medication, as
soon as they feel a little better. This leads to its recurrence. Education of patients about the need for
prolonged treatment and monitoring until complete recovery is an important part of the control of
tuberculosis.
Nutrition in Infections, Fever and Lung Diseases                                                       279

     It is very important to take the drug and diet treatment consistently until the patient is fully back
to normal health. Failure to do so results in recurrence of the disease; the resistant bacteria, which
cause the second attack, are hardy and hard to treat.

Asthma, Chronic Bronchitis and Emphysema
      Asthma, chronic bronchitis and emphysema are grouped together as Chronic Obstructive
Pulmonary Disease (COPD). The group has a common characteristic, which is air-flow reduction or
obstruction. A lot of attention is given to its pathophysiology, but the nutrition aspect of treatment does
not receive adequate attention.
      There are about 300 million air-sacs (alveoli) in the lungs. The symptoms of injury are noticed
only after 60 per cent of these air sacs are affected. The symptoms and possible causes of COPD
are given in Table 25.4.
      A very large number of Indians suffer from these ailments. A large percentage of annual deaths
from chronic bronchitis and emphysema are due to excessive smoking cigarettes or bidis.

                                Table 25.4 Characteristics of COPD


                         Disease                                 Symptoms

                 Asthma                             increased response of trachea and
                                                    bronchi to stimuli, airways reduced,
                                                    swelling of airway wall, excess mucus,
                                                    wheezing, coughing, difficulty in
                                                    breathing.

                 Chronic bronchitis                 excess mucus, inflamed airways,
                                                    hyperactive bronchi, difficulty in
                                                    breathing out

                 Emphysema                          reduced lung surface area, destruction
                                                    of air sacs and air spaces in lungs,
                                                    wheezing, chronic cough, chest shape
                                                    distorted to barrel shape due to
                                                    overwork and over-inflation of muscles


      Nutritional Status: Nutritional status is poor and weight loss is noted. Breathing difficulties do
not permit normal eating. The sputum formed affects tastes adversely. Due to insufficient oxygen
supply, peristalsis is reduced resulting in poor appetite. In addition the drugs given to improve breathing
cause gastric irritation. In severe cases, the low oxygen supply and side effects of drugs may lead to
ulcer formation in the stomach in about 20-25% of the patients.

      Treatment: Avoidance of predisposing factors is an important part of cure. Dust allergy is one
of the most common causes of asthma. The mites present in dust which have been found to be the
280                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

cause, have to be removed by frequent washing of bed sheets and pillow covers, wet wiping of floors
and fans and vacuum cleaning the books, papers and other articles, which the patient has to handle in
daily life.
      Diet Therapy: The first aim in diet therapy is to prevent malnutrition or correct it if it has
occurred. The energy needs increase many fold in comparison to normal needs of a person of
comparable age and size. In extreme COPD cases, the energy used for breathing can be 10 times that
of the normal rate.
      Energy: Energy needs need to be met; but intake must be monitored to match the oxygen
available. Thus one can avoid production of excess carbon dioxide which may cause acidosis. These
patients have limited ability to excrete carbon dioxide, so diet must contain foods with low respiratory
quotient (RQ). RQ of fats is 0.7, proteins 0.8 and carbohydrates 1.0. So non-protein calories can be
provided by high fat to carbohydrate ratio, which will decrease carbon dioxide production. Such
formulas are available to treat severe cases.
      Plan of Meal Times: Rest before meals helps to improve intake of food. Slow, deep breathing
and relaxation practice helps eating. It also helps to avoid swallowing air, which can disrupt flow of
food. Eating small meals slowly, wearing loose garments, not lying down, bending over or exercising
soon after meals are helpful. Small frequent meals helps to reduce anorexia and decrease pressure on
stomach due to fullness. It permits free movement of diaphragm and decreases fatigue.
      Some drugs used to dilate bronchi have caffeine – like side effects, so caffeine should be avoided
by patients on such days. To avoid undesirable side effects, it is advisable to take medicines with food.

Study Questions
      1. What is infection? What is natural immunity?
      2. How do you plan a diet for a patient suffering from tuberculosis?
      3. Describe symptoms and treatment of chronic obstructive lung disease.
                                                                                   CHAPTER 26


                            Nutrition in Diseases
                     of the Gastrointestinal Tract


      Introduction
      The G.I.Tract
      General Aspects of Digestion
         Food and Gastric Acidity
      Constipation
         Treatment, Diet
      Diarrhea
          Therapy: ORS, Low Residue Diet
      Food Tolerance



Introduction
       The gastrointestinal tract is involved in transforming the food eaten into energy to meet the
body’s needs for its sustenance and function. Anything that affects its function disturbs this process
and leads to disease.
       The gastrointestinal tract consists of esophagus (food tube), stomach (mixes food and forms
chyme) , small intestine (small diameter tube 20 ft. long, consisting of the duodenum, the jejunum
and the ileum) and large intestine (large diameter tube which includes cecum, colon, rectum and
anal canal).
       The food is ground in the stomach into tiny particles. The stomach secretes mucous to protect
the lining of the gastrointestinal tract. In addition it also secretes hydrochloric acid and several enzymes
and readies the food for digestion by changing it into semifluid chyme. The pancreas secrete pancreatic
juice into the duodenum to facilitate the digestion of the food in the small intestine. Food products
carried by blood vessels from the walls of the digestive tube are delivered to the liver, the largest organ
in the digestive system (Fig. 25.1).
       The dietary factors associated with ailments of the gastrointestinal tract (G.I.) are:
       (i) Acidity, (ii) inadequate fiber, (iii) fat, (iv) substances such as gluten in wheat and (v) lactose.
       One more substance - alcohol – does affect the health of the G.I. tract adversely. But it is not a
food, nor is it a dietary essential.
282                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                                 Figure 26.1 The gastrointestinal tract


General Aspects of Digestion
      Food and Gastric Acidity : Foods normally have a pH of 5 to 7, while the pH of acid (hydrochloric)
secreted in gastric juices in the stomach is less than 2. The pH of citrus fruits and other acid tasting
foods is about 3.5 or more. Therefore, no food is acid enough to change the acidity of the stomach
contents. This is very important information and needs to be given to patients who suffer from acidity,
so that they will not avoid vitamin C rich foods and develop vitamin C deficiency.
      Protein-rich foods neutralise gastric acid. Milk is therefore the food of choice used to treat
acidity. Its neutralising effect lasts for half to two hours. Fat reduces acid production and decreases
motility. Hence addition of cream to milk was used to treat peptic ulcer. But the use needs to be
moderated to avoid the risk of atherosclerosis due to the saturated fats in cream.
Nutrition in Diseases of the Gastrointestinal Tract                                                   283

      Stimulants increase the production of gastric acid. Hence these need to be avoided by persons
suffering from acidity. The stimulants to be avoided include tea, coffee, alcohol, tobacco, meat extracts
in soups and gravies and spices – chilli powder, black pepper, mustard seeds, nutmeg.

Constipation
      According to a research survey in Mumbai, over 70 per cent of the persons studied complained
of constipation.
      Persons, who have little or no exercise especially elderly persons, suffer from atonic constipation.
They limit their food selection to soft, low-fiber foods; they limit fluid intake to prevent urination,
especially at night. They become dependent on laxatives and yet find no relief, as the causative factors
are not eliminated.
      Treatment: The following changes in routine and diet help to get rid of the constipation:
       (i) Increase fluid intake to 1200 to 1500ml. i.e., 5 to 6 glasses of water in addition to other
           beverages and liquid foods (soups, buttermilk, etc.)
      (ii) Include 200 to 250g of vegetables and fruits in the diet and
     (iii) Exercise regularly e.g., walking ¾ to 1 hour daily,
     (iv) Do fitness exercises, and/or
      (v) Suryanamasksars or yoga daily.
      Diet: Their diet needs to be modified gradually to high fiber diet as listed below :
       1. Eat whole wheat chapati and bhakari as major part of the meal and reduce intake of white
          bread and polished rice
       2. Include cooked preparations of germinated pulses in the diet.
       3. Take two or more servings of cooked vegetables such as cluster and other beans, gourds
          (snake, ridge, bitter, sponge, etc.)
       4. Eat raw vegetables such as cabbage, carrot, cucumber, tomatoes, radish etc.
       5. Include two or more servings of fruits such as amla, banana, papaya, chiku, guava, melons,
          jackfruit, berries, apples, etc.
       6. Take beverages such as buttermilk, lemon squash, mango panhe, kokum drink, to increase
          fluid intake.
       7. Drink 5 to 6 glasses of water, as a drink to ensure movement of food in the digestive tract
          and smooth elimination of waste products.
      The changes in the diet must be introduced gradually to avoid feeling of bloating or cramping due
to the changes.

Diarrhoea
      Diarrhoea is one of the most common G.I. tract ailments. It is still the second most common
cause of death in childhood, killing over 1.5 million children in India alone.
      The occurrence of diarrhoea indicates that there is contamination of food and water with virus
and bacteria from human faeces. In diarrhoea, the stools are liquid or semisolid and large volumes of
these are passed frequently. There is also vomiting, cramps and abdominal pain. The food passes
284                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

through the gastrointestinal tract so rapidly that its digestion and absorption is reduced. The fecal
matter moves through the colon so fast that water and electrolytes are not reabsorbed.
       Frequent and/or prolonged attacks result in loss of fluids, electrolytes, minerals, vitamins, proteins,
fats, carbohydrates and as a result there is loss of body weight. This leads to dehydration.
      Therapy: The first step is to identify the cause and remove it. If diarrhoea is severe and dehydration
has set in (eyes sunken, skin loose and inelastic, passing reduced amounts of dark urine), fluids and
electrolytes may be first given intravenously to let the gastrointestinal tract to rest. This is followed by
feeding fluids, with gradual move to oral rehydration therapy and later to a very low residue diet.
(Tables 26.1 and 26.2)

                 Table 26.1 WHO Formula for Oral Rehydration Solution (ORS)


            Sodium chloride               3.5g       Dissolve in one liter
            Sodium bicarbonate            2.5g       boiled, cooled water. Do not boil after dissolving
            Potassium chloride            1.5g       these ingredients in water
            Glucose                       20.0g
            Directions for use of ORS:
            1. Use a clean cup and spoon
            2. For infants, use a dropper. Babies who are breastfed, should continue to be breastfed
               in addition to ORS
            3. Let the patient sip the liquid from the spoon, not drink it.
            4. Feed one cup for each stool passed
            5. Even if the patient vomits, in the first couple of hours continue to feed ORS in small
               sips


      If oral rehydration mixture is not available, use a home-made one containing sugar (40g), and salt
(3.5 g) per liter supplemented with potassium rich foods such as coconut water, lemon juice, banana,
mashed papaya, mashed plantains etc.
Low Residue Diet
      Oral rehydration therapy is followed by a very low residue diet in cases of severe diarrhoea. The
low residue diet of less than 10g of fiber a day reduces the normal work of the intestines by restricting
the amount of dietary fiber and reducing food residue. Food residue is the bulk in colon that includes
undigested food, intestinal secretions, bacteria and cells shed from the intestinal lining. The foods
allowed and foods avoided in low residue soft diet are listed in Table 26.2. It consists mainly of liquids
such as buttermilk, dal soup, broth, vegetable and fruit juices, coconut water, etc. some soft foods
such as soft cooked dal, cooked eggs, pureed mild-flavoured vegetables, apple sauce, fruit pulsp ,
refined breads, soft cooked rice, custards, kheers, etc. can gradually be added to improve the nutrient
content, as the condition of the patient improves and appetite slowly recovers.
      The patient needs to progress from liquid diet, soft diet to normal diet gradually. Contamination
of food must be prevented to avoid recurrence of diarrhoea.
Nutrition in Diseases of the Gastrointestinal Tract                                                   285

                   Table 26.2 Foods Allowed and Avoided in Low Residue Diet

                    Foods Allowed                                Foods Avoided
               Buttermilk, (2 C only)                            Whole milk
               Dal soup and soft cooked dal
               Eggs (all but fried)                              Legumes, nuts, fried foods,
               Soups and soup broth                              Fibrous meat
               Vegetable juices and cooked or                    Vegetable and fruit fiber
               pureed mild-flavoured vegetables,
               dudhi, pumpkin
               Fruit juices, banana, apple sauce,                Pickles, preserves
               Fruit pulp (papaya, melons etc.)
               Coconut water
               Refined breads, soft cooked rice,                 Coarse cereals and breads
               noodles, chapatti, etc.                           Whole grain breads
               Kheer, jelly, custard, biscuits, plain cakes

               Tea, coffee if allowed


Food Tolerance
      Food tolerance is highly an individual reaction to intake of various foods. Some persons suffer
from heartburn, flatulence and distention of abdomen, when they consume certain foods. Tolerance to
such foods is highly an individual reaction and needs to be treated as such. The foods mentioned as
cause of the discomfort include dry beans and split dals of redgram, bengal gram and sometimes black
gram. Among the vegetables, strong flavoured ones containing sulfur compounds such as cabbage,
cauliflower, leeks, onions, radishes and turnips are mentioned. Some persons cannot tolerate even
cucumbers and watermelon. It is important to record the diet history of the patients, including their
perceived food tolerance, before preparing a diet plan for treating them.
      Persons, who are nervous, tense, too worried, insecure, feeling neglected and/or anxious, tend to
suffer from gastrointestinal ailments. Their emotions affect the function of the digestive tract adversely.
Other factors noted are:
       (i) irregular eating hours,
      (ii) quick gulping down of food and hence poor mastication,
     (iii) lack of rest and
     (iv) lack of rational schedule.
      Luckily there is a wide choice of foods available in each food group and it is possible to plan a
nutritionally adequate diet, using foods, which are well tolerated by the patient.
      In view of the above, in treating patients suffering from gastrointestinal ailments, diet plan needs
to be individualized.
286                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      In addition to a diet plan, the persons need to be helped to modify their thinking to accept their
duties rationally, plan their day’s schedule of work and food intake. Stress should be reduced. They
need to be guided to have regular times for meals, a short period before and after eating for relaxation
and sufficient time for each meal to permit eating slowly.

Study Questions
      1.   List foods included in the treatment of acidity.
      2.   List the changes in routine and diet which help to treat constipation.
      3.   What is ORS? How is it given?
      4.   List foods to be avoided in low residue diet.
      5.   What are the factors which affect food tolerance?
                                                                                CHAPTER 27


   Nutrition in Diseases of Liver, Gallbladder
                                    and Pancreas


     Introduction
     Functions of Liver
     Liver Diseases : Jaundice, Hepatitis, Cirrhosis, Other Complications of
         Cirrhosis – Ascites, Edema, Cholestasis & Steatorrhea
         Hepatic Failure
     Gallbladder Diseases
     Diseases of Pancreas.



Introduction
       The liver is the largest organ in the body, which plays a vital role, performing many complex
functions essential for life. Liver serves as our body’s internal chemical power plant. The health of the
liver is a major factor in the quality of our life.

Functions of Liver
     Some important functions of liver are:
      • to convert carbohydrates in the food to stored energy and chemicals necessary for life and
        growth,
      • to manufacture proteins, metabolise proteins, absorb fat products and make them available
        as fuel; produce bile, essential for the digestion of fats and stored in the gall bladder.
      • to store iron, copper and other minerals for use in the metabolism.
      • to ensure storage, absorption and function of fat soluble vitamins A, D, E and K and their
        precursors
      • to act as filter to remove alcohol and toxic substances from the blood and convert them to
        substances that can be excreted from the body
      • to process drugs and medications absorbed from the digestive system, enabling the body to
        use them effectively and dispose of them.
288                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Thus the liver manufactures proteins, processes carbohydrates, absorbs fat products and makes
them available as fuel. The liver serves as a storehouse of vitamins and minerals and processes iron for
the blood system. It dispatches sugars to tissues to burn to provide energy. Lastly it detoxifies any
poison that may enter the bloodstream and renders it harmless. Gall bladder is the store of a number of
essential chemicals in digestion including bile (Figure 27.1).
       A number of reactions in the metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates and fats take place in the
liver. Iron, copper and other minerals are stored in the liver. Important reactions which ensure storage
and function of fat soluble vitamins A, D, K and their precursors take place in the liver. Liver is also
involved in detoxification of harmful substances (including poison) and alcohol metabolism.
       As much as 85-90% of the blood that leaves the stomach and intestines carries important nutrients
to the liver, where these are converted into substances the body can use. Carbohydrates or sugars are
stored as glycogen in the liver and are released as energy between meals or when the body’s energy
demands are high. In this way, the liver helps to regulate the blood sugar level and prevent hypoglycemia
or low blood sugar. This enables us to keep an even level of energy throughout the day.




                Figure 27.1 The G.I. tract showing liver(7), Gallbladder and pancreas(8)
Nutrition in Diseases of Liver, Gallbladder and Pancreas                                                   289

     Liver and biliary system diseases are caused by infections (virus, bacteria and parasites), toxic
chemicals, alcohol intake, poor nutrition and metabolic disorders.
     Any injury to liver disturbs the body’s capacity to use food nutrients and has a devastating effect
on the well being of the person.
Jaundice
     Jaundice is characterised by yellow colour of skin and tissues. In jaundice, the blood levels of bile
pigments are high. This is a frequent sign of liver and biliary tract diseases.
     Therapy: The primary aim is to protect the liver from further stress and help it to function as
normally as feasible. Therefore, a nutritionally adequate diet is basic to avoid permanent damage.
     Diet: The modification of diet is based on:
    (a) Generous intake of good quality protein to regenerate tissues and prevent fatty infiltration
    (b) High carbohydrate intake to spare protein and synthesis of glycogen
     (c) A moderate fat restriction
    (d) providing vitamin supplements and
     (e) ensuring sodium restriction, if there is edema.
Hepatitis
      In this disease, liver is inflamed and degeneration may have occurred. There are four types of
hepatitis - A, B, C and D. In all these, the symptoms are similar. The symptoms are loss of appetite,
nausea, abdominal pain, vomitting, diarrhoea, fever and loss of weight. Jaundice follows, if these
symptoms are not treated promptly by diet modification.
      Diet: In hepatitis the main therapy consists of nutritionally adequate diet and bed rest. The aim is
to ensure recovery of damaged tissues and to prevent further damage.
      In the early stages parenteral fluids or tube feeding may be necessary, if nausea and vomitting is
severe. Interferon therapy may be useful in the beginning.
      Appetite is normally poor. So it is crucial that meals are attractive, small and frequent – 5 to 6
meals at regular intervals are suggested. It is advisable to follow the tips given below :
        • Give a full liquid diet in six small feeds, as soon as the patient is able to eat (refer to table 24.3
            & 24.4, chapter 24).
        • Follow it by a soft fiber-restricted diet (please refer to chapter 24, table 24. 7) and then a
            normal diet.
        • A high calorie, high protein diet is given (refer to table 25.2), if there is extensive weight
            loss.
        • A low fat diet is given in the beginning and gradually move is made towards normal fat intake
            as the biliary tract obstruction is cured.
        • Adequate calorie supply and glycogen synthesis are ensured by giving a high carbohydrate
            diet.
        • Vegetables with strong flavours, spicy foods, as also rich desserts are avoided as these may
            affect food tolerance adversely. In this aspect the patient’s personal reactions are important.
Cirrhosis
       Many chronic liver diseases are associated with malnutrition. One of the most common of these
is cirrhosis. In cirrhosis the damaged liver cells are replaced by fibrous scar tissue, which disrupts the
290                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

liver’s important functions. Cirrhosis occurs as a result of excessive alcohol intake (most common ),
common viral hepatitis, obstruction of the bile ducts, and exposure to certain drugs or toxic substances.
It is also found in highly malnourished children.
       Liver cirrhosis is a chronic disease in which there is considerable damage to its cells, with
infiltration by fats and fibrosis.
       Symptoms are similar to other liver conditions, mentioned already. These include loss of appetite,
nausea, vomiting and weight loss, giving an emaciated appearance. Diet alone does not contribute to
the development of this disease. Well nourished people, for example, who drink large amounts of
alcohol, are also susceptible to it. If neglected, liver failure may follow.
       Diet: Patients with cirrhosis require a balanced diet providing 2,000 to 3,000 calories a day to
allow the liver cells to regenerate. Thus the diet recommended is a normal high calorie, adequate protein
diet with vitamin and mineral supplements. Too much protein will result in an increased amount of
ammonia in the blood, too little protein can reduce healing of liver.
       There are a number of complications of cirrhosis which can be helped through a modified diet.
       Persons with cirrhosis often experience an uncomfortable buildup of fluid in the abdomen (ascites),
or a swelling of the feet, legs or back (edema). Both conditions occur due to hypertension that is
increased pressure in the veins entering the liver. Since sodium (salt) encourages the body to retain
water, patients with fluid retention need to reduce their sodium intake. Therefore sodium in the diet
needs to be restricted to 500 – 700 mg per day. This level of sodium is achieved by ensuring that there
is no addition of salt to foods and avoidance of sodium rich foods such as papads, pickles, baked foods
containing baking powder or other sodium salts as leavening agents.
       Patients with damaged esophagus may need to avoid stimulants (tea, coffee), irritants (spices,
tobacco) and fiber.
       Small frequent feedings of a full liquid diet, followed by a very low residue and then by a soft
fiber-restricted diet may help the patient to recover.
       Other liver diseases in which diet changes aid recovery include cholestasis and steatorrhoea.
In this condition the bile cannot flow into the small intestine to aid in the digestion of fats. As a result,
fat is not absorbed. Backup of bile in the liver is called cholestasis. In this condition fat is not absorbed
and is excreted in large amounts in the feces. It is noticed when feces become pale-coloured and foul-
smelling. This condition is called steatorrhea. The loss of fat calories may result in weight loss too.
       To alleviate this condition special fat substitutes need to be used, which are les dependent on bile
for their intestinal absorption. These include special fat substitutes such as medium chain triglycerides
and safflower oil. Patients suffering from steatorrhea may also need to use water soluble form of
vitamins A, D, E and K, as they may have difficulty absorbing fat soluble forms of these vitamins. As
excess vitamin A is toxic to the liver, such substitution needs to be carried out under the guidance of a
physician.
Hepatic Failure
      Hepatic failure is also known as enlarged liver disease.
      Liver function is severely reduced due to reduction in the number of functional liver cells. This
affects a number of reactions such as:
      (a) Conversion of ammonia to urea is disturbed, accumulated ammonia is toxic to the central
           nervous system.
      (b) The breakdown of aromatic amino acids is reduced (phenylalanine, tyrosine and tryptophan)
           and these accumulate in the blood.
Nutrition in Diseases of Liver, Gallbladder and Pancreas                                                291

     (c) Branched chain amino acids (leucine, isoleucine and valine) are broken in peripheral muscle
          for energy and their blood level decreases.
     The neurological and neuromuscular abnormalities may lead to coma; if not treated, it may lead to
death.
     Diet: The main principle is to reduce protein intake to minimise ammonia production. This can be
done as follows:
     (a) Protein free to low protein diet – 20 to 30g is given for a few days. As improvement
          occurs, protein intake is increased by 5 to 10 g every few days, until the intake reaches 40
          to 50 per day. The protein profile can be improved by ensuring intake of branched chain
          aminoacids, orally, enterally or parenterally.
     (b) to prevent tissue breakdown, 1500 – 2000 kcal are provided in the form of carbohydrates
          and fat.
     (c) Patients, who are unable to take nourishment orally, tube feeding or parenteral nutrition is
          given.
     The bacterial growth, which results in ammonia production, is controlled by medication.
     In extreme conditions, when liver damage is irreparable, liver transplant is made.

Diseases of the Gall Bladder
      Bile produced in the liver is concentrated and stored in the gall bladder. Stones or inflammation of
gall bladder obstructs the flow of bile. Fat digestion is impaired for want of bile and there is pain in the
abdomen, nausea and vomitting.
      Diet Therapy:
      (a) Obese persons are found more likely to suffer from gall bladder disease is. Hence losing
           excess weight and maintaining normal weight is suggested for those who are susceptible to
           this condition.
      (b) To ensure the contraction of the gall bladder and hence the pain, fat intake needs to be
           reduced.
      (c) During acute attack, no food is given to rest the system. Gradually the patient is given clear
           fluids followed by soft fiber-restricted low fat (20 – 30g) diet.
      (d) Secondary bile acids may be given to dissolve small stones present. Ultra sound shock
           waves are used to shatter the stones.
      As a last resort, gall bladder maybe removed by laproscopic surgery.
      After surgery, a low fat diet is given to permit healing.

Diseases of the Pancreas
      Pancreatic Insufficiency (inadequate pancreatic enzyme production)
      Pancreatic diseases include acute and chronic pancreatitis. The symptoms are inflammation,
edema and self digestion of the pancreas by its enzymes due to blockage.
      The digestion of starch, fats and protein is reduced and these are excreted resulting in malnutrition.
Absorption of fat soluble vitamins is also reduced. In severe cases, there is necrosis and risk to life due
to failure of cardiac, renal and/or respiratory systems.
292                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Diet Modifications: The main aim is to stop pancreatic secretions and let pancreas rest. Therefore
the patient is given nothing orally and total parenteral nutrition is given. Hydrochloric acid production is
decreased.
       When the patient stabilises, oral feeding with clear liquids is started, followed by soft fiber –
restricted and later by high protein, high carbohydrate and moderate fat diet. It is divided into six small
meals and given by using the foods allowed. Water-soluble forms of fat soluble vitamins are given as
supplements. Pancreatic enzymes may also be given protein.

Cystic Fibrosis
      Cystic fibrosis is a genetic disease in children. One in 2000 babies born alive may suffer from it.
In this disease, the pancreatic and bile ducts, intestines and bronchi are obstructed by a thick secretion
of exocrine gland, thus preventing their normal function.
      Symptoms vary according to the systems affected and the extent to which they vary. When thick
mucosa in the lungs affects the bronchi, there is dryness and coughing; respiratory infections occur
often. When pancreas are blocked, enzymic digestion is disturbed and the undigested, foul smelling
food (carbohydrate, fats) excreted in stools frequently. Other systems are affected as a secondary
outcome. These include liver, intestine, heart, kidney and reproductive system.
      Diet Therapy: A great breakthrough in treatment is the recent development of enteric, pancreatic
enzymes microspheres , coated with a pH sensitive substance that will not dissolve until it reaches the
small intestine. These are taken with meals and snacks to improve digestion of food. The nutrient
needs may increase in this condition. For example, energy needs may be 50 to 100 per cent and protein
50 per cent above the recommended dietary allowances. If tolerated, 30 or more per cent of the energy
needs may be given in the form of fat. Water soluble form of vitamin supplement and mineral supplements
are given. Extra salt may be needed in hot weather and during heavy physical activity.
      Good diet and bed rest are the main therapy. The aim is to recoup tissues damaged due to the
disease.

Study Questions
      1.   List the functions of the liver.
      2.   Write short notes on: Jaundice, hepatitis, diet for cirrhosis patient, steatorrhea.
      3.   List metabolic changes which occur in hepatic failure
      4.   List the changes to be made in diet to treat gall bladder disease.
      5.   What is cystic fibrosis? How is it treated?
                                                                             CHAPTER 28


                 Nutrition in Diabetes Mellitus


     Introduction
     Symptoms and Diagnosis
     Classification: Type I, Type II, Other Types
     Nutritional Care: Energy, Fibre, Lipids, Proteins, Sweeteners, Sodium,
         Vitamins and Minerals, Alcohol.
     Diet Plan, Meal Distribution, Exchange Lists
     Control of Type I Diabetes, Insulin, Exercise
     Control of Type II Diabetes, OHAs, Illness, Monitoring Control
     Acute Complications: Hypoglycemia, Acidosis & Coma,
        Neuropathy, Retinopathy, Atherosclerosis and Nephropathy



Introduction
      Diabetes mellitus, commonly known as diabetes, is one of the most serious diseases affecting
humanity. Its incidence has increased alarmingly and it affects 18 million Indians as reported in the
Journal of the Diabetic Association of India in 1999.
      Studies indicate that there may be just as many undetected diabetics and twice as many may be on
the verge of getting it. Undetected and hence untreated diabetes is one of the main causes of further
complications such as loss of limbs due to impairment of nerves and loss of vision due to retinal
detachment.
      Diabetes is a chronic, degenerative disease that affects the way body uses food. In normal
digestion, body converts sugars, starches and other substances into glucose, which is carried by the
blood to every cell in the body. The glucose is used with the help of insulin (a hormone made in the
pancreas) to produce energy for every action–pumping blood to writing to physical movements of our
body.
      Diabetics are unable to produce insulin, make too little or are unable to use it.
      Diabetes is not a disease, which can be cured. It can only be kept under control by the patient
with the help of the nutritionist assisted by the physician. If not kept under control, a number of
294                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

complications occur. These include:
      (a) loss of sensation in peripheral nerves, resulting in injury, infection and amputation of lower
            extremities.
      (b) Eye disorders leading to blindness
       (c) Thickening of arteries and
      (d) Kidney dysfunction.
       Proper care of diabetes is essential to prevent or at least reduce incidence of complications. It
is vital that the patient learn all about the disorder and its management, for health care in diabetes is
basically self-care.
       A proper nutrition plan is the foundation of successful diabetes management. Control of diabetes
rests on three factors: diet, exercise and insulin.

Symptoms and Diagnosis
      As diabetes develops, the person complains of excessive thirst (polydipsia), increases frequency
and amount of urine and feels very hungry. Young patients lose weight, while older patients may be
overweight. The presence of sugar in the urine and above normal blood sugar level are clinical symptoms
of diabetes. A fasting blood sugar level of 120 mg/dl or higher on two different days indicates that the
person suffers from diabetes.

Classification of Types of Diabetes Mellitus
       There are three types of diabetes mellitus:
       Type I is Insulin Dependent Diabetes Mellitus (IDDM) – About 10 to 20 per cent of known cases
of diabetes are of Type I. There is no insulin or insufficient insulin to regulate blood glucose, because
the beta cells are destroyed or are very few. The reason for the destruction of the beta cells can be an
auto immune reaction, viral infection, genetic aberration and/or stress.
       It may occur at any age but a large number of patients are young. Most of the diabetic cases
occurring before 20 years of age are of Type I. The disorder starts abruptly with typical symptoms
mentioned above.
       Type II is Non-Insulin-Dependent–Diabetes Mellitus (NIDDM): 80 to 90 per cent known cases
are of type II. In these, insulin receptor response is decreased while insulin production may be normal,
increased or decreased. Sudden shock, trauma or tragic event in the family, heredity and excess body
weight are contributory factors. Most patients are obese. Most cases occur during the mid-thirties or
mid-forties. The onset is gradual and the ailment is detected during a routine medical check-up. If the
diet is suitably modified and regular exercise is taken, these persons do not need insulin except during
stressful days.
       Other types of Diabetes Mellitus: A third type of diabetes occurs in association with certain
conditions. These include chronic pancreatitis or as a corollary to intake of some medications such as
glucocorticoids, antihypertensives, etc. In this type the plasma glucose levels are higher than normal,
but lower than those indicative of diabetes.
       Gestational diabetes occurs in some women during pregnancy. Diet modification as indicated
for type II diabetes helps to correct the glucose intolerance during pregnancy. The blood glucose
returns to normal after delivery; but many of these women develop diabetes mellitus in later years.
Nutrition in Diabetes Mellitus                                                                          295

      Nutritional Care: is the cornerstone of diabetic therapy.
      Energy needs are same as for other individuals. The aim is to attain and then maintain a healthy
weight for the body size and type. If an obese patient loses weight, it leads to improved glucose
tolerance. Ideally 55 – 70 per cent calories should be mainly from complex carbohydrates. The aim is
to control blood glucose and lipid levels.
      Fibre: It is observed that substituting highly refined carbohydrates in the diet with foods, containing
complex carbohydrates and fibre, benefits both type I and type II diabetics. Such diets improve
glucose tolerance control, often decreases insulin requirements and tends to lower serum cholesterol
and triglyceride values. It also helps to control weight and lower blood pressure.
      Intake of fruits is beneficial for diabetics. The soluble fibres (pectin, gums, hemicelluloses) present
in fruits increase transit time, slow glucose absorption and lower serum cholesterol. Fibre content of
common foods is given in table 28.1.
      Fenugreek seeds, recommended as addition to diabetic diet in ancient medical system, are valuable
due to their high content of mucilaginous and total fibre. It also contains an alkaloid (trigonelline),
which is known to lower blood sugar level.
                      Table 28.1 Fibre Content of Common Foods (Per Serving)


                      Food                                Serving Size          Fibre/Serving EP

         Guava, red gram tender                                50g                   2.6 – 3.1

         Cluster beans, peas                                   50g                   1.6 – 2.0

         French beans                                          50g                   0.9 – 1.5

         Grapes, chiku, seetaphal                              50g                   0.9 – 1.5

         Legumes, chawli, mung, vatana                         25g                   0.9 – 1.1

         Fruits: Banana, apples, papaya                        50g                   0.4 – 0.6

         Whole wheat, jowar, bajra                             25g                    0.3- 0.5

         Carrots, beetroot, suran, potato, onion               50g                   0.2 – 0.6

         Dry spices                                             1g                   0.2 – 0.3

       Lipids: In diabetic diet, the total fat should be 20 to 30 per cent of the total energy. Of these
saturated fats contribute about a fourth (7-10%), monounsaturated half (10-13%) and polyunsaturated
about a fourth (8-10%) of the total energy. Cholesterol content of the diet should be less than 300 mg
per day.
       In a 2000 calorie diet, the calories from fat would thus be 400 to 600, which amounts to about 45
to 65 grammes of fat in the diet, a third of it is taken in hidden form. Hidden fat as we have seen in
chapter 5, occurs in foods such as milk, dahi, nuts, oilseeds, eggs and meat. Hidden fats content of
diet varies, but is estimated to provide about a third or more of the total fat in the diet. Thus the visible
fat intake in the diet as butter, ghee and oil used in food preparation can be 30 to 40 grammes. In order
296                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

to control the saturated fat intake, the amounts of animal foods such as ghee, butter, cheese, eggs and
meats must be monitored to provide less than 15 grammes of the total fat intake.
      Proteins: The recommended amount of protein is 0.8g/kg of ideal body weight. Adolescent
children, pregnant or nursing mothers need increased intake up to 15 to 20 per cent of total energy.
      Sweeteners: Use of artificial sweeteners in reasonable amounts is acceptable to control total
calorie intake.
      Sodium: A moderate sodium intake of 1 gram/1,000 calories is recommended, because many
diabetics are hypertensive or have hypertension. Foods containing sodium such as pickles, papads, and
baked foods containing baking powder should be avoided.
      Vitamins and Minerals: Requirements are similar to those of other individuals. There is no need
for supplements.
      Alcohol: Alcohol is not a food and its use places an additional burden on the system. Its use is not
advisable especially when oral hypoglycemic agents are to be taken as part of the therapy.
      How do we translate the above guidelines into a diabetic diet prescription?
      Suppose the diabetic person is 50 years old, who is involved in light activity.
      His healthy weight is 55 kg.
      Total energy needed : 55 × 30 = 1,650 calories
      Proteins : 0.8/kg or 0.8 × 55 = 44.0 g, rounded to 45 g.
      45 × 4 = 180 calories from proteins (11%).
      Fats: 28% or 16.50 × 28 = 462 calories/9 = 51g fat
      CHO : 1650 – (180 + 462) = 1008/4 = 252g (61%)

      Diet Plan: The diabetic has to follow the diet plan through the rest of her/his life. Hence the meal
plan should be based on her/his normal schedule, meal pattern, food acceptance, food preparation
methods and facilities available. It should also take into account the cultural – religious factors. Meal
plans should be realistic, attractive and flexible, within the limits of the diet prescriptions. Meals should
be as similar to the family meals as possible.
      Meal Distribution: It is important to distribute the carbohydrate foods in the meals through out
the day. Avoid taking too high an amount of carbohydrates at any one meal. The type I diabetics need
three meals and two or three snacks each day. As these persons use insulin, the carbohydrate intake
should coincide with the action time of the insulin used.
      Type II diabetics or NIDDM patients, who do not need insulin, can take the three large meals at
7-8 am, 12-1 noon and 7-8 pm; in addition a snack at 4-5 pm and a fruit after supper may be eaten
around 10 pm before retiring.
      Exchange Lists: The patient must study the food exchange lists available for planning diabetic
diets (Table 28.2). Plan the menu by dividing the food exchanges into various meals according to the
patient’s need and choice. A sample menu for a 50g protein diet is given in Table 28.3.
      Sample menu can be distributed according to the needs of the patient and whether the patient is
type I or type II diabetic.
      It is important to include minimum number of servings of basic food groups. Ensure that you
include whole grain cereal preparations (chapatis, bhakari/roti, whole wheat preparations, etc.), three
Nutrition in Diabetes Mellitus                                                                            297

to four servings of vegetables two of fruits (one being vitamin C rich) and four to five servings of
protein foods.
                 Table 28.2 Veg. and Non-veg. Diet Plan for Using Exchange List

    Exchange                 No. of      Vegetarian              Exchanges   Non-Vegetarian
      list                 Exchanges CHO    Pro     Fat             No     CHO   Pro     Fat

    Chapati                        4    80          12     —         4         80            12     —
    Rice                           4    80           7     —         4         80             7     —
    Jowar                          2    36           5     —         2         36             5     —
    Milk                           2    15          10     10        2         15            10     10
    Dals/beans                     2    30          10     —         1         15             5     —
    Egg/fish/meat                —      —           —      —         1             0          6      6
    Vegetable                      3     9           6     —         3             9          6     —
    Fruits                         2    12          —      —         2         12            —      —
    Fat                            6    —           —      30        7         —             —      35

    Total g                            262          50     40                 247            51     51

    Total Calories -        1648       1088        200    360     1651        988           204    459

     %age Calories from                66.0        12.1   21.9                59.8          12.4   27.8


                           Table 28.3 Sample Menu (based on Table 28.2)

                    Breakfast                                    Snack
                      Pohe                2S                     Upma                  2S
                      Musumbi/guava       1S                     Tea/coffee
                      Bread – butter    1+1S
                                                                 Supper
                    Lunch                                        Bhakari (Jowar)   2S
                      Chapati                 2S                 Rice              2S
                      Usal                    1S                 Dal               1S
                      Vegetable               1S                 Dahi              ½S
                      Dahi/lassi              ½S                 Vegetable         1S
                                                                 Salad             1S

  Note: In the above menu, one can reduce 1 fat exchange and add 2 tsp sugar/jaggery to improve
        acceptability.
        The sugar can be used in tea/coffee and jaggery can be used in food preparation, especially
        in dal, usal and vegetables.
298                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Control of Type I Diabetes
      In chemical control, the blood glucose is kept normal and urine sugar free by taking properly
measured diet and insulin. It is believed that it will prevent or postpone further complications of diabetes
mellitus.
      Insulin: Insulin is a protein. It has to be injected to ensure its being used as a regulator in the
body. If taken orally, it would be digested like any food protein and will not be able to regulate the use
of blood glucose. The amount of insulin needed depends on the patient’s requirements; it can be
reduced by exercise, while any infection or other stress may result in increased need. A number of
types of insulins are available with different duration and speed of activity. The type that helps a patient
to function effectively is chosen. Most diabetics, who need insulin, take one dose daily, while a few
may need two doses per day.
      Exercise: Exercise is an important part of any treatment plan. It should be selected to fit in with
the person’s capacity and requirements. It has many beneficial effects:
      It helps to maintain weight, heart function, control of blood lipids and reduce adverse changes
due to stress.
      Persons with IDDM need to reduce their insulin dosage before and during exercise or take a
carbohydrate containing snack to prevent hypoglycemia due to exercise.

Control of Type II Diabetes
      Besides diet control, insulin and oral hypoglycemic agents may have to be taken by diabetic
patients to metabolize excess glucose.
      Oral Hypoglycemic Agents (OHA): When NIDDM is not controlled with diet and exercise, oral
agents are sometimes used. These agents require the presence of endogenous insulin. Hence these are
not suitable for use in IDDM.
      OHA initially stimulate beta cells to increase insulin production (which may be temporary) and
thus control glucose levels. These may increase the number of insulin receptor sites, thus improving
glucose use.
      Illness: Illness should be reported to the health care provider. Insulin or OHA should be continued
if these are being used. Food should be taken as usual, with change to soft or liquid diet as needed.
Sufficient amount of fluids should be taken.
      Monitoring Control: (a) Check blood glucose to keep day-today control
      (b) Check glycosylated hemoglobin to check long term index of control.
      (c) Check urine glucose. Main value of this test is to confirm elevated blood glucose and monitor
           ketonuria. It is not a reliable test to detect hypoglycemia or the degree of hyperglycemia.
           Some substances give false or negative results; these are megadoses of ascorbic acid,
           salicylates and levadopa.

Acute Complications
    Hypoglycemia– blood glucose less than 50 mg/dl.
    When a diabetic participates in games or increased activity without taking food, hypoglycemia
may occur.
Nutrition in Diabetes Mellitus                                                                        299

      When a diabetic takes an overdose of insulin or OHA, and does not eat at the scheduled time,
there is a decreased supply of glucose, which results in fall of blood glucose level. When the blood
glucose level falls below 50mg/dl, hypoglycemia occurs. Hypoglycemia may also occur, when a diabetic
has diarrhoea or vomits, as this results in a decrease in blood sugar level.
      Hypoglycemia is accompanied by a feeling of weakness, giddiness and fainting, if not attended to
promptly.
      If the person is conscious, he/she should be fed sugar, hard candy, fruit juice, sugar containing
carbonated beverage or syrup, which give quick relief from symptoms. If the person is unconscious,
intravenous glucose should be injected immediately.
      A diabetic should carry sugar. hard candy or glucose tablets, for use when needed. A diabetic
should carry a medical identity card indicating that she/he is a diabetic and should be given intravenous
glucose if she/he is unconscious due to hypoglycemia. Such immediate treatment can avert extended
hypoglycemia, which causes damage to the central nervous system and the brain.
      Acidosis and Coma: Type I diabetics are in danger of suffering from acidosis.
      It is caused by severe lack of insulin and stress. There is an increase in lipolysis (breakdown of
fats for energy) and production of fatty acids. Liver oxidises fatty acids to meet energy needs. In the
diabetic state, liver oxidises fatty acids and produces acetone, acetoacetate and beta-hydroxybutyrate.
These tend to spill over into the urine causing ketonuria.
      Prevention is very essential and involves ensuring that carbohydrate is distributed in the daily
meal to fit in with type of insulin, its dosage and time of injection.
      Thus by treating early symptoms promptly, coma can be prevented.
      In older patients (NIDDM), the cause must be identified and treated quickly. It is very important
to prevent dehydration.

Long-term Complications
     Poorly controlled diabetes increases risks of long-term diabetic complications. These health
problems relate mainly to tissue changes affecting blood vessels in vital organs.
     Neuropathy: These changes in the nerves involve injury and disease in the peripheral nervous
system, especially in the legs and feet. It results in sensory loss and causes numbness in feet. Inadequate
blood supply leaves the foot susceptible to injury, infection, gangrene and ultimately amputation. Hence
the need to pursue the diet, exercise and if need be insulin, very methodically and avoid or delay
complications.
      Retinopathy: The changes in the eyes include thickening of capillaries with small hemorrhages
from broken arteries in the retina, with yellow waxy discharge or retinal detachment. This complication
can eventually cause blindness. Retinopathy is not to be confused with blurry vision that occurs sometimes
as one of the first signs of diabetes. Blurry vision is due to the increased glucose concentration in the
eye fluids, which brings about brief changes in the light-refracting surface of the eye.
      Atherosclerosis: Another complication is the development of fibrous plaques on the inside lining
of major blood vessels, which thickens gradually, narrowing the interior part of the blood vessel and
restricts blood flow. This complication occurs in diabetics about four times as often as in the general
population. This risk factor accounts for the need to reduce dietary fats and cholesterol in diabetic diet.
300                                                Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Nephropathy: The thickening of capillaries in the glomerulus leads to nephropathy, later to
renal failure, which is the leading cause of death among IDDM patients.

Study Questions
      1.   List symptoms of Diabetes mellitus.
      2.   What are the various types of diabetes mellitus?
      3.   Discuss the nutritional guidelines in planning diet for a diabetic person.
      4.   Write short notes on: Exchange lists of food, control of type I diabetes, hypoglycemia,
           neuropathy, retinopathy
                                                                                CHAPTER 29


         Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases


     Introduction
     Risk Factors, Blood Lipids, Cholesterol
     Plan to Monitor Serum Lipid Levels
     Meal Planning and Food Exchange Lists
     Meal Preparation Guidelines
     Heart and Blood Vessel Diseases; Hypertension, Atherosclerosis
     Diet Therapy: Moderate Sodium Restriction, Adequate Potassium
         Intake, Regular Exercise, Stress Management
     Sodium Restricted Diets
     Sources of Sodium in the Diet; Foods, Salt, Sodium Compounds Used in Food
        Preparation, Diet Plan
     Food Preparation for Sodium Restricted Diet
     Angina Pectoris
     Myocardial Infarction, Diet
     Congestive Heart Failure, Therapy, Diet



Introduction
      Cardio means of heart and vascular means of blood vessels. Thus cardiovascular diseases
include ailments of heart (CHD) and of blood vessels (atherosclerosis).
      The heart is the strongest and toughest muscle in the body. As the arteries carry blood from the
heart to the lungs and other tissues, any damage to the artery results in a variety of heart diseases.
      Cardiovascular diseases include hypertension, ischemic heart disease, leading to angina pectoris
and lastly myocardial infarction. Hypertension is increased blood pressure or high BP in short. In
ischemic heart disease, there is lack of blood to the heart muscle resulting in a heart attack. In angina
pectoris, there is reduction of blood supply to the heart muscle due to narrowing of the artery wall.
Myocardial infarction is caused by thrombosis, which is coagulation of blood in blood vessel or
organ.
302                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Cardiovascular diseases develop in three stages:
       (a) In the first stage, arterial damage begins due to fat oxidation products, hypertension and/or
            smoking.
       (b) As it progresses, there is deposition of fatty material in the arterial wall, increasing its thickness,
            making it narrow and rigid. The movement of oxygen and nutrients is made more difficult as
            the arterial passage is narrowed. The heart must pump harder driving blood pressure up
            (high B.P. or hypertension).
       (c) Lastly there is heart attack, which is also known as coronary occlusion, coronary
            thrombosis or myocardial infarction. It is virtually like a traffic jam, causing insufficient
            supply of blood to the tissues of the body beyond the point of blockage. If the blockage is in
            the artery connecting to the brain, it leads to stroke. As blood supply is crucial to the
            sustenance of life, it is crucial that the patient gets immediate medical aid to minimise the
            damage and save life.
        Ailments of the heart are on the rise and even young persons succumb to these ailments. Hence
it is important to understand the contributing factors, to prevent these as far as possible and arrest their
progress to minimize the damage.

Risk Factors
      The major risk factors are:
       (i) elevated serum cholesterol
      (ii) emotional stress
    (iii) hypertension
     (iv) lack of activity leading to obesity and
      (v) smoking
      Heredity is an additional risk factor, for one inherits the food habits and often the life style of
one’s parents.
      All researchers in this field uniformly agree that high blood lipids levels are a primary cause which
contribute to most serious heart disorders. High sodium intake may be involved in hypertension.
Blood Lipids
      In Chapter 5, you have noted that lipids are transported in the blood stream from one part to
another to be utilized. Hence blood lipids are a useful measure, first for detection and later for monitoring
and evaluation of recovery after treatment. High levels of blood lipids (and its components, cholesterol
and triglycerides) is an important risk factor in the development of coronary artery (heart) disease.
(CAD/CHD) (Table 29.1)
                                      Table 29.1 Serum Lipid Levels

        Serum Level                        Desirable              Borderline high           High risk
                                            mg/dl                    mg/dl                    mg/dl
        Total Serum cholesterol            160                    190 – 239                 240 and above
        LDL cholesterol                    Less than 130          130 – 159                 160 and above
        HDL cholesterol                    More than 35           less or equal to 35
        Serum triglycerides                30 – 190               250 – 500                 500 and above
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                    303


Cholesterol
      Few heart attacks occur in people who have cholesterol levels in the 160mg/dl range according to
research studies conducted at Stanford and other medical centres in the world.
      Increased serum cholesterol level above 200mg/dl and low density lipoproteins (LDL) above 130
mg/dl are associated with increased risk of CHD. The level of high-density lipoprotein (HDL) in the
blood is likely to be more important indicator than total serum cholesterol, as it protects the blood
vessel against the formation of atheroma (fatty deposit).
      Intake of high fat diet, especially saturated animal fats leads to obesity. The fat is first stored
primarily in the adipose tissues and later minute amounts are deposited in the blood vesels. These fat
deposits thicken the walls of blood vessels and this condition is known as atherosclerosis. Any plan to
correct the situation must include modification in the fat component of the diet.
Basic Nutritional Plan to Monitor Serum Lipid Levels
      The diet changes which have proved to be effective in preventing or reversing heart disease have
the following nutritional goals:
        • Reduce the total amount of fat, mainly the saturated fat in the diet.
        • Use polyunsaturated fat in place of saturated fat in the diet
        • Decrease the intake of the amount of dietary cholesterol
        • Increase physical activity to alter cholesterol components in the blood.
        • Attain ideal body weight and maintain it.
      To accomplish these goals, the diet must have high carbohydrate (50 –70% of total calories),
adequate protein (12-20% of total calories) and reduced fat (20 to 30 % of total calories). The fat
component must be such that it contains a third to half of polyunsaturated fat, a third monounsaturated
fat sources and the remaining part may consist of saturated fat sources. The composition of food fats
is given in Table 29.2. It can help to modify one’s diet in the right direction.
      In a 2000 calorie diet, the calories from fat would thus be 400 to 600, which amounts to about 45
to 65 grammes of fat in the diet, a third of it is taken in hidden form. Hidden fat as we have seen in
chapter 5, occurs in foods such as milk, dahi, nuts, oilseeds, eggs and meat. Hidden fats content of diet
varies, but is estimated to provide about a third or more of the total fat in the diet. Thus the visible fat
intake in the diet as butter, ghee and oil used in food preparation can be 30 to 40 grammes. In order to
control the saturated fat intake, the amounts of animal foods such as ghee, butter, cheese, eggs and
meats must be monitored to provide less than 15 grammes of the total fat intake.

Meal Planning and Food Exchange Lists
      Food selection guide (table 29.3) and food exchange lists for meal planning (Appendix B ) can be
a valuable tool in choosing foods to be used in the diet.
      Cereals and Their Products: It is advisable to include whole cereal products such as chapatti,
bhakri, for most of the servings from this group.
      Parboiled rice may be used in fermented preparations such as idli. The intake of refined cereal
products such as bread, nan, bhature etc. must be reduced. The number of servings from this group
varies from 7 – 12 and depends on the person’s total energy needs, but must provide 55 to 70 per cent
of the total calories.
304                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

          Table 29.2 Saturated and Unsaturated Fatty Acid Composition of Food Fat

                                                    Fatty Acids (%)
                Foods                                                 Unsaturated
                                    Saturated (%)       Monounsaturated        Polyunsaturated
                                                         (% Oleic Acid)       (% Linoleic Acid)
         A. Vegetable Oils/Fats
             Groundnut                     16-19               47-60                20-30
             Mustard                           5                  32                   18
             Sesame                        13-14               38-49                38-42
             Olive                         11-15                  75                 7-10
             Corn                          13-15               26-29                   55
             Soybean                       14-15                  25                50-60
             Cottonseed                    23-30               17-25                50-54
             Sunflower                      8-11               14-18                65-70
             Safflower                      6-10               13-25                67-74
             Coconut                       80-90                 5-6                  1-2
             Vanaspati                        25                  73                    2

         B. Animal Fats
             Butter                        45-65               27-32                  1-4
             Ghee                             64                  33                  Nil
             Whole milk cow’s                 64                  29                    4
             Human milk                       46                  38                    8
             Cheddar cheese                   65                  28                    3
             Egg                              10                  13                    2
              Poultry                      30-40               40-44                14-20
              Fish (low fat)                 2-5                 2-3                    4
              Lamb, pork, beef             45-50                  44                  2-6

         C. Nuts
             Groundnuts                        9                  25                   14
              Walnuts                          4                  10                   40

      Dals and Legumes: are important sources of protein, iron and B complex vitamins in the vegetarian
Indian diet. It is advisable to use whole legumes which provide additional fibre. Cooked germinated
pulses provide some vitamin C also. The number of servings may vary from two to four, depending on
the age and the type of dietary (vegetarian or non-vegetarian)
       Both fresh and germinated beans will help control cholesterol. The dry ones can be soaked and
germinated to add variety. The fibre helps to excrete CHOL and thus reduce its concentration in the
blood.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                        305

      Milk and Its Products: Only toned milk or doubletoned milk, its curd, buttermilk and skim milk
products can be used liberally. But limited amounts of whole milk, especially buffalo milk needs to be
used after removing the fat layer after cooling. Similarly, ghee and butter, need to be used in very
small amounts (only a teaspoon) as these are high in cholesterol and saturated fats.
                                    Table 29.3 Food Selection Guide

    Foods – Include As per            Foods Include Liberally                   Foods to Avoid
    Prescription
    Cereals – rice, wheat     Green leafy vegetables                  A. Fatty sweets– mithais, laddus,
                                                                         chocolates, shreekhand, basundi,
                                                                         rabdi, cakes, pastries, cream
    Jowar, bajra, nachni etc. Salad vegetables-                          biscuits, pies, doughnuts etc.
                              All gourds,
                                                                       B. Fatty fried foods– Shev, chivada,
                              Fruit vegetables,                           farsan, wafers, chaklis, Fried papad,
                              Fruits – melons, amla *                     kurdais, khari biscuits etc. bhajias,
                                                                          wadas, samosas, cutlets, etc.
    Dals and legumes
    Milk without cream        Thin buttermilk                          C. Nuts (esp. dried ones) cashews,
                                                                          groundnuts, coconut, almonds,
    Lean meat                 Coconut water                               walnuts etc.

                                                                      D. Salty sauces and oily dressings
    Fish and egg white        Clear soups condiments-lime juice
                                                                       E. Sodium rich foods– pickles, papad,
    Vegetable oils            Tamarind, cocum, vinegar etc.               sandage, baked products made
                                                                          with baking powder
    Sugar, jaggery
                                                                       F. Soft drinks and alcoholic drinks–
    Salt                      Spices and spice mix to flavour food        beer, scotch etc.
                              and garlic

* All gourds include ash, bitter-, snake-, ridge-, etc. Salad vegetables include cucumber, radish, tomato, onion
etc. Fruit vegetables include drumstick, pumpkin, bhendi, dudhi, brinjal, tinda, etc

      Eggs, Fish, Poultry and Meat: Egg yolk is a concentrated source of cholesterol (275 mg/each
egg yolk). Whole egg intake is suggested to be a maximum of two per week, including those used in
preparations such as egg curry, cakes, custards, etc.
      Meat intake is suggested to be limited to one to two servings of lean cuts with all visible fat
removed. Fish (low fat ones) and chicken (with skin removed) may be used in these servings to
control fat intake.
      Vegetables and Fruits: Vegetables and fruits are good sources of minerals, vitamins and fibre.
The number of servings suggested are five to six, one of which should be a seasonal one rich in beta-
carotene.( leafy vegetables such as amaranth, fenugreek, spinach, radish leaves etc.) and another
vitamin C rich one. (amla, guava, orange, musumbi, papaya tomato, drumstick leaves etc.). The remaining
three servings may be selected from any of seasonal beans and fruit vegetables.
      Fruits and vegetables are the best dietary source of antioxidants in the diet. The lycopene from
tomatoes has been shown to be particularly effective at stopping LDLs from oxidizing.
306                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Citrus fruits and apples contain soluble fibre in the form of pectin. Pectin can lower total and LDL
cholesterol.
      Vegetable Preparation: A variety of vegetable salads can be prepared. Dahi, lemon juice, herbs
(coriander, mint, curry leaves) and spices (cumin seeds, mustard, fenugreek, asofoetida etc.) can be
used to season these. Raw as well as cooked vegetables (pumpkin, gourds) are used to prepare salads
and raitas. Vegetables can be seasoned with a little oil and spices (whole and powdered) to enhance the
flavour and acceptability according to the family pattern.
      Sugars, Sweets and Low-fat Desserts: These must be used in limited amounts not exceeding
three teaspoons of sugar, honey or jam; half a cup of kheer made with toned milk, 2-3 mints or 1/3 cup
gelatin dessert.
      Oils and Fats: Butter, ghee and animal organ fats (such as liver) are rich sources of vitamin A.
But as these contain cholesterol (about 300 mg/100g) their intake must be restricted suitably to fit in the
total dietary intake of 300 mg cholesterol per day (Table 29.4).
              Table 29.4 Cholesterol Content of Foods (mgs/100g edible portion)

                           Food                                         Cholesterol (mg)

                  Milk, whole (6– 8% fat)                                       11
                  Milk, fluid (4% fat)                                        1–2
                  Butter (86% fat)                                             280
                  Ghee (100% fat)                                              315
                  Cheese (whole milk – 24% fat)                             135 – 160
                  Milk sweets                                                   65
                  Skimmed milk powder (1% fat)                                 0.4
                  Eggs (hen’s)
                  Egg yolk frozen                                              133
                  Egg fresh, whole                                             468
                  Organ and Animal Fats
                  Lamb (raw), pork, beef                                        70
                  Chicken (with skin)                                           80
                  Chicken (without skin)                                        60
                  Liver                                                        300
                  Heart                                                        150
                  Brain                                                       2,000
                  Kidney                                                       375
                  Lard and other animal fats                                    95

      Use of Oils and Fats: Choose oils to maintain the proper balance of PUFA, MUFA and saturated
fat. Corn, cottonseed, sunflower, safflower and soybean oils contain a high percentage of PUFA;
sesame, groundnut and olive oil are rich in MUFA.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                   307


Meal Preparation Guidelines
      A 1200 calories low fat vegetarian diet food exchanges are given in Table 29.5. The calories,
protein, fat and cholesterol content of the diet is also included. Please note that when eggs and flesh
foods are excluded, the cholesterol content of the diet is reduced to 45mg by using toned milk and only
one teaspoon of ghee or butter.
      The menu plan based on the foods indicated in Table 29.5 is presented after the table. A number
of variations of this menu can be made using the food selection guide given in Table 29.3 and food
exchanges in Appendix B. The food exchanges can be increased gradually to maintain one’s ideal body
weight, when the desired weight loss has occurred.
                           Table 29.5 Low Fat Diet – Vegetarian (1200 Calories)

          Food                    Exchanges        Calories      Protein        Fat      Cholesterol

         Cereals                          7          595             18         —               —
         Dal                              2          170             11         —               —
         Milk (toned)                     2          200             10           9             30
         Egg/Flesh foods                —             —              —          —               —
         Vegetable A                      2           —               2         —
         Vegetable B                      2           70           4–6          —               —
         Fruits                           2           40             —          —               —
         Fat (half ghee)                  2           90             —           10             16
         Sugar                            2           40             —          —               —
         Total                                      1205        45 – 47          19             46

                                Total Calories: 1205, Protein: 45g, Fat: 19g
                                Calories from Protein             = 15%
                                Calories from fat                 = 14%
                                Calories from carbohydrate        = 71%
                                Cholesterol                       = 46 mg/day

                                                  Menu Plan
         Morning –      Tea 1C (+ 1 tsp sugar)
         Breakfast      Milk 1C                                  Tea + Snacks
                        Bread 2 slices                             Tea 1C ( + 1 tsp sugar)
                        Banana ½ big or 1 small                    Dhokla – 4 pieces (no oil)
         Lunch          Chapati 1                                Supper
                        Rice ½ C                                   Bhakari ½
                        Dal 1C                                     Rice ½ C
                        Palak Bhaji ½ C                            Dal 1 C
                        Tomato Salad                               French beans ½ C
                        Dahi ½ C                                   Cucumber Salad
                                                                   Dahi ½ C
308                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     Alterations in Knowledge and Habits: It is important to know food composition ( from authentic
sources), learn to develop healthy eating habits, make wise choices while eating out. For sedentary
persons, increased physical activity will improve both physical fitness and food utilisation.
     Some clinicians prefer that the patients adhere to the dietary and life style changes, which have
been found to reduce the serum cholesterol in a number of studies. A low fat, 1600 calorie diet to
maintain one’s ideal body weight has been presented in table 29.6. The possibility exists that the
medications used to alter the blood lipids may cause long-term negative effects.
                         Table 29.6 A 1600 Calorie Low Fat Diet (Vegetarian)

                                    No.of                           Diet Pattern
                Foods             Exchanges         CHOs        Proteins           Fats   CHOL

          Cereals                        7             128            20            —         —
          Pulses, dals                   3              42            16            —         —
          Milk, toned                  2.5              19            12             12       38
          Eggs/Meat                     —               —             —             —         —
          Vegetables                     4              24              8           —         —
          Fruits                         2              22              2           —         —
          Fat                            5              —             —              25       24
          Sugar                          4              20            —             —         —
          Total                                        255            58             37       62
          Calories (from)                             1020      +    232        + 333     = 1585

                            Total calories = 1585, Protein = 58g, Fat =37g, CHOL = 62mg


      When medications have to be taken to improve the serum lipid profile and reduce hypertension,
these may interfere with the nutrient use in the body. It is important to discuss these aspects with your
doctor and take remedial steps suggested by him/her.

Heart and Blood Vessels Diseases
      Therapy in ailments of heart and blood vessels involves nutritional care.
      Hypertension is the most common problem in humans in India, though almost seventy-five per
cent of the cases are mild. If unchecked, it can be a major risk factor for other serious heart conditions.
      Normal blood pressure is less than 140mm Hg Systolic and less than 85mm Hg diastolic.
      Hypertension has many causative factors though in 90 per cent of cases, the cause is unknown.
      Atherosclerosis (narrowing of the arterial walls due to deposits of fatty material) causes resistance
to blood flow, making the heart to pump harder, thus increasing the blood pressure. The increase in
blood pressure injures the arteries further, thus worsening the atherosclerosis.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                    309

      Therefore, it is essential to bring the blood pressure back to normal, to prevent the damage to the
circulation system.
      Diet Therapy: Hypertension may be often due to obesity, because the increased weight means
increasing work of the heart to supply blood to the extra tissue formed. For many overweight hypertensive
people, dietary changes which result in weight loss will lead to reduction in blood pressure. This may
be adequate therapy in mild cases. But there are normal and underweight persons who suffer from
hypertension.
      The second possibility is excessive sodium intake, which draws more water into circulation, thus
increasing blood volume, leading to increased blood pressure. There are about 20 per cent people who
are sensitive to sodium and may be affected by excess sodium intake; other 80 per cent appear to be
relatively free from the adverse effects of excessive sodium intake. Research studies have shown that
increase in potassium intake can lower blood pressure. Increase in intake of alcohol in excess of 2 ozs.
daily has a hypertensive effect, which increases with the amount consumed.
      It is important to remember that blood pressure control is one of the most effective ways to
decrease mortality in adults.
      In patients, whose only problem is mild hypertension ( diastolc pressure of 90-94 mm Hg),
therapy without use of drugs is used to achieve control. This includes:
      (a) Moderate sodium restriction ( 1000-1500 mg/day): No salt in cooking or at the table. No
            processed foods (pickles, papads, canned foods etc. containing salt). Four servings of
            regular bread can be taken.
      (b) Adequate potassium intake: Plant foods are rich sources of potassium, especially fruits
            and vegetables. Potassium is present in higher concentration than sodium in fruits and
            vegetables by a factor of 5 to 50 fold. Hence intake of three to four servings of fruits, which
            need no preparation (hence no addition of salt), can ensure adequate potassium intake.
      (c) Regular exercise tailored to the individual is a must – walking 5 kilometres daily has been
            found to be an ideal way to keep fit. It needs no equipment and can be undertaken in all
            weather.
      (d) Stress management: is a very important aspect of therapy. It involves regular planning of
            one’s activities allowing realistic scheduling of work, relaxation, physical activity, mealtimes,
            prayer/meditation and rest. This removes the stress from one’s days, as there is time available
            for each aspect of the day. Thus one does not rush from one activity to the other, gulp down
            food on the run or skip meals. People under stress are unable to function effectively. They
            are worried and tense all through the day, because so many tasks are unfinished due to no
            planning or poor planning. A planned, enjoyable routine of each day is the most important
            part of therapy to stress management.
      (e) Abstaining from alcohol consumption is the most desirable part of the therapy. If one cannot
            follow it, alcohol intake must be restricted to occasional 2 oz limit.

Sodium Restricted Diets
     Most people’s daily intake of salt is 3-7 g ( 3,000-7,000 mg). Levels of sodium restriction commonly
prescribed are:
     (a) 500-700 mg is severe restriction. No sodium is used in cooking or at the table. Processed
          foods (pickles, papads, kurdais, wafers etc.) or canned vegetables containing salt are avoided.
310                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

          Low sodium bread, if available, should be used. Vegetables which have naturally high sodium
          content are omitted.
      (b) 1000 –1500 mg is moderate restriction. It is described above.
      (c) 2000-3000 mg is mild restriction. Small measured amount of salt is used in cooking. A
          small plastic spoon (given with ice cream cups at stores) could be used to add salt in
          cooking, instead of a teaspoon to avoid excess sodium.

Sources of Sodium in the Diet
      All living things, plants and animals require some sodium. Hence all foods contain some sodium,
even before they are processed or cooked in the home. Most plant foods are low in sodium. Animal
foods – meat, fish and poultry are naturally high in sodium. Eggs are especially high in sodium (most of
sodium is in the egg white)
      Most vegetables which are low in sodium, are permitted in the diets restricted to less than 1000mg;
but not beets, spinach, chad and kale, which contain large amounts of sodium.
      Fruits, unsalted butter, unsalted cereals and breads, oils, sugars can be used without restriction,
as these contain very little or no sodium.
      Vegetables and fruits, which are low in sodium, are listed in table 29.7. This list may be useful in
selection of foods to be included in sodium-restricted diets.
                    Table 29.7 Low Sodium Sources of Vegetables and Fruits

                 Sodium Content                                  Vegetables

                 Less than 5 mg/100 g EP               Bitter gourd (green), bottle gourd.
                                                       brinjal, french beans, onion stalks,
                                                       parwar, ridge gourd, onions

                 5 to 11 mg/100 g EP                   Pumpkin, ladies finger (bhendi), peas,
                                                       cucumber, colocasia, potato, sweet
                                                       potato, tapioca (dried chips), yam,
                                                       brussel sprouts

                 12 – 15 mg/100 g EP                   Cabbage, green plantain.


                                                                     Fruits


                 Less than 6 mg/100 g EP               Amla, guava, orange, papaya,
                                                       peaches,       plums,       chiku,
                                                       pomegranates, tree tomato, phalsa.

                 7 to 13 mg/100 g EP                   Pears, ripe tomato.

     Salt: Salt is the main source of sodium in the diet. It is used in cooking, baking, at the table and
in processing foods. Salt contains 40 per cent sodium, so a teaspoon of salt, which weighs 6 g,
contains 2.4 g or 2400 mg of sodium. So if a teaspoon of salt is added to a recipe which serves six
persons, each person would get 400 mg in the serving.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                    311

      Sodium compounds used in food preparations: Soda or sodium bicarbonate used in baking and
food preparations (e.g., Papad) is a source of sodium in the diet. Hence the need to avoid such foods
in a sodium restricted diet.
      A number of drugs contain sodium e.g., Alkalizers, laxatives, sedatives and antacids.
      The exchange list for meal planning (Appendix B) may be modified for sodium restricted diet.
High sodium foods/drugs to be avoided.
        • Vegetables – knol-khol, amaranth, field beans and tender tur.
        • Fruits – muskmelon (kharbooja), lichis, dried fruits and cherries.
        • Salty snacks – potato, banana or other chips/wafers, pop-corn, salted nuts, chiwda, shev,
           pharsan, bhajia, vada, chat, chana-dana, bhel etc.
        • Papads, kurdayas, pickles, chutneys, sauces, khatta-mitha, etc.
        • Baked foods – which contain baking powder, baking soda and/or salt such as bread, biscuits,
           cakes, pastries etc.
        • Salted butter, cheese, khari lassi.
        • Salted fish and meats.
        • Sodium containing drugs such as laxatives, alkalizers, cough medicines, sedatives, antibiotics
           etc.
      Diet Plans: Food exchange list of 1000 mg sodium diet is given in table 29.8 at two energy
levels.
                         Table 29.8 Food List for a 1000 mg Sodium Diet

                                        1200 Calorie                  1600 Calorie           Na
          Food List                       Exchanges                    Exchanges            (mg)
          Cereals                             5                             7              530
          Dals                                3                              4              120
          Eggs/Mutton                         3                              3               75
          Vegetables                          3                              3              135
          Fruits                              3                              3              110
          Milk, toned                         2                              2               50
          Fat                                 2                              3
          Sugar                               2                              4
                                                                                           1020

      These 1000 calorie diets might be permitted for patients after the third or fifth day after congestive
heart failure or myocardial infarction. The 1600 calorie diet might be useful for the maintenance stage.
When the patient returns home, the sodium level may be increased to 2000 mg.

Food Preparation for Sodium Restricted Diet
      It takes about 3 months to get used to a sodium restricted diet. By that time the taste preference
for salt decreases.
312                                                       Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Use of spices, herbs, flavour extracts (cocum, tamarind, etc.) helps to improve acceptance of
salt less recipe. These include lemon juice, pepper, green pepper, onion, garlic etc., which may be used
in vegetables, stews and salads.

Angina Pectoris
      Narrowing of arterial lumen and hence insufficient blood supply to the heart causes angina pectoris.
It manifests by tight chest pain, often shooting pain in the shoulder, arm and hand. Physical exertion,
excitement, the pressure of digesting a heavy meal or sudden exposure to cold wind may precipitate it.
Weight loss, if the patient is obese, is helpful. Medication is used to relax heart muscle.

Myocardial Infarction
        An infarct is necrosis (dead) local area, due to lack or poor blood supply resulting in the death of
cells. When such an infarct forms in the heart, it is known as myocardial infarction (or heart attack).
If it is in the brain it is called a stroke.
        If the infarct (cluster of dead cells) is small, the rest of the tissue may heal, but the infarct leaves
a scar. With therapeutic care, the rest of the organ can continue to function. But if more infarcts are
formed, the ability of the organ is continuously reduced, which may imperil life.
        Acute Stage: Care is highly individualized, suited to the condition of the patient. Electrocardiogram
is used to monitor the condition of the patient. The work of the heart muscle can be minimised by
letting the patient rest. Medications are given to help the heart muscle relax.
        Diet: For 24 to 48 hours the patient is only given parenteral dextrose and no food is given by
mouth, but sips of cool water are given. After that low fat liquid diet (500 to 800 calories and 1000-
1500 ml fluid diet) is given in very small feeds for 2 to 3 days.
        The patient progresses to a soft diet (about 1000-1200 calories), which may help establish
circulation needed for digestion and absorption of food. The diet is given in five or six easily digestible
meals. The fat content of the diet is less than 30 per cent of total calories, with less than.300mg
cholesterol and less than 10 per cent calories from saturated fat.
        The sodium is restricted to less than 1000 mg for a congestive heart failure patient, while it may
be mild for less serious condition. Gas producing foods as per patient’s perception are avoided. In
edema cases fluid is restricted.
        The patient is gradually helped to progress to maintenance diet, before leaving the hospital. The
patient is helped to get used to a low salt diet, low cholesterol diet so that the recurrence of heart attack
is prevented.

Congestive Heart Failure
       In this condition, the heart is unable to maintain sufficient circulation to tissues. Reduced pumping
ability leads to congestion of lungs and systemic circulation. Kidneys are unable to excrete sodium
normally, resulting in accumulation of sodium in extracellular fluid and water retention. This results in
at first of the extremities and later the abdomen and the chest retaining water and swelling.
       The gastrointestinal tract and hence, digestion slows down due to reduced blood supply. There
is loss of appetite, distention and at times vomiting.
       Therapy: Patient must take bed rest. Oxygen may be needed.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                             313

       Diet: The workload of heart must be reduced. The dietary progression is similar to that given
above for myocardial infarction. In addition severe sodium restriction (500 – 1000 mg) and fluid
restriction may be advisable.

Study Questions
      1. List the cardiovascular diseases and the stages of their development.
      2. Write notes on: major risk factors leading to cardiovascular diseases, desirable serum lipid
         levels, steps to monitor serum lipid levels, saturated and unsaturated fatty acids.
      3. List how foods are chosen for inclusion in diet to control heart ailments.
      4. Write short notes on: Hypertension, atherosclerosis, stress management, sodium-restricted
         diets, sources of sodium in the diet, myocardial infarction.
                                                                                CHAPTER 30


        Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases


     Introduction
     Functions of Kidneys: Filtration, Maintenance of Fluid,
        Electrolyte and Acid-base Balance, Excretion, Regulation of Blood Pressure
        and Conversion of Vit. D to Calciferol
     Causes of Kidney Diseases: Inflammation and Degeneration,
        Other Diseases Damage Kidney Function, Chemical Damage & Infection and
        Obstruction
     Kidney Ailments
        Glomerulonephritis: Diet Therapy
        Chronic Glomerulonephritis: Diet Modifications
        Nephrotic Syndrome: Diet Modifications
     Acute Kidney Failure: Diet Modifications
     Chronic Renal Failure: Dietary Modifications, Energy, Protein, Minerals & Fluid
     Dialysis, Kidney Transplant
     Kidney Stones: Diet therapy
         Calcium Stones, Oxalate Stones, Uric Acid Stones
     Prevention of Kidney Stone Formation



Introduction
      Like the liver, kidneys play a vital role in maintaining the body’s normal state (homeostasis).
There are two kidneys in the human body. The nephron is the basic functional unit of the kidney. Each
kidney has about a million nephrons. Each nephron has two main parts. Bowman’s capsule (a cup-
shaped top of the nephron) with a network of capillaries called the glomeruli (plural of the word
glomerulus) in it, and the renal tubule. The tubule is a long winding tube, the first part of which
surrounds the glomerulus. The fluid is driven by a pressure gradient from glomerulus into the tubule
and the filtration begins. As the filtrate moves along, the materials needed are returned to the blood and
waste material is carried to the bladder for storage and discharge at normal intervals.
Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases                                                                 315

       Each nephron functions independently to produce urine. The glomerulus part of each nephron
filters only a small drop of fluid a day. But the volume of plasma filtered by two million glomeruli
amounts to a formidable 150-180 liters in 24 hours.
       The Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) is the total amount of fluid filtered each minute by all
the glomeuli of both kidneys. This is normally about 125 ml. per minute and is one index of kidney
function. Most of the fluid (approx. 98.9 to 99.4 per cent) that passes through the winding tubule is
reabsorbed; only 1 to 2 liters of urine gets excreted each day. This means that over 99 per cent of the
filtered water, all the glucose and vitamin C, almost all amino acids, sodium and other substances are
returned to the blood. But if the intake of salt exceeds the body’s needs the excess is excreted and extra
water is needed to excrete it.

Functions of Kidneys
     The kidneys help to regulate the internal harmony by performing the following functions:
      1. Filtration: The kidneys are the filters through which all dissolved substances pass and
           selectively absorb those to be retained. Figure 30.1 depicts the urinary system. The end
           products of protein metabolism (urea, creatinine, uric acid and urates) are removed from
           blood by filtration to be discarded in urine. Excess of chloride, potassium, sodium and
           hydrogen ions are also filtered out from the blood. By being selective filters, kidneys try to
           maintain a constant blood composition and volume.
      2. Maintenance of Fluid, Electrolyte and Acid-base Balance. Ions from the blood are secreted
           into the urine to maintain acid-base balance In this process they monitor the composition and
           volume of blood and other body fluids. Kidneys maintain fluid electrolyte and acid-base
           balance as they carry out selective filtration.
      3. Excretion: The kidneys excrete dissolved unwanted substances filtered out of the blood as
           urine.
      4. The kidneys help regulate the blood pressure.
      5. Kidneys produce erythropoietin (a hormone), which stimulates maturation of red blood
           cells in the bone marrow.
      6. The conversion of vitamin D to its most active form calcitriol occurs in the kidneys.
           Activated vitamin D regulates the absorption of calcium and phosphorus and thus helps
           regulate calcium and phosphorus levels in the blood.
     When kidney function is disturbed due to disease or trauma, all the above functions are affected
adversely.

Causes of Kidney Disease
     Several ailments may cause kidney disorders. These include infection, degenerative changes,
chronic diseases (e.g., diabetes mellitus, cardiovascular disorders such as atherosclerosis, hypertension),
medications, toxic metal consumption, cysts, renal stones or trauma. Surgery, burns and poisons are
some traumas, which may cause kidney damage.
     Obesity increases the risk of renal disease. Habitual intake of high protein diet may increase the
work of kidneys and cause damage. Reducing weight, decreasing protein intake to normal level can
decrease the risk of kidney disease.
Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases                                                                   317

     Chemical Damage. Environmental agents such as pesticides, solvents, etc. may cause kidney
damage. Animal venom, certain plants and drugs may also damage kidney tissue.
     Infection and Obstruction. Bacterial infection in urinary tract may cause mild discomfort,
which can be alleviated by medication, if treated promptly. If not treated, it may cause more involved
chronic disease. Kidney stones may block drainage and may cause further infection and tissue damage.
     Diet therapy in renal disease is based on the nature of the disease and individual response.

Kidney Ailments
       Any disease that affects the function of the glomerulus or tubule disturbs the body’s ability to
utilise food and can cause havoc.

Glomerulonephritis
       Nephritis is a general term used to indicate inflammation of the kidneys. When capillaries in
glomeruli are inflamed, it is called glomerulonephritis.
       An acute form of glomerulonephritis often follows a streptococcal infection of the respiratory
tract, tonsillitis, pneumonia or scarlet fever. It occurs mostly in children and young adults. If the
infection is very mild, it may not be detected and treated, resulting in permanent damage to the system,
which may be detected after many years. The symptoms include nausea, vomiting, fever, rise in blood
pressure, albumin (proteinuria) and small amounts of blood in the urine (hemanuria) and edema.
Usually recovery is complete.
       Diet Therapy: When there is nausea and vomiting in the acute stage, sweetened fruit juices,
sweetened tea, ginger-lemon sherbet, high carbohydrate, low electrolyte supplements are given. These
help to reduce tissue breakdown. Fluid intake is monitored in proportion to the urine output.
       As soon as the patient is able to eat, a diet to maintain weight containing sufficient calories is
given. If urine volume is decreased (as in oliguria) fluid is limited. Protein is also restricted to 40g. The
proteins included must be of high biological value. Sodium is limited to 1g/day. Table 30.1 presents diet
and a menu plan for such a patient.
Chronic Glomerulonephritis
      It can either be an untreated acute glomerulonephritis or an immunological cause of unknown
origin. In the early stages, abnormal urine analysis results such as protein, red and white blood cells are
observed in the urine. As the ailment advances, the patient may suffer from tiredness, edema, increase
in blood pressure and blurred vision. As the kidneys cannot concentrate urine, there is frequent urination
and need to urinate often in the night, thus disturbing sleep. If not checked by treatment, it can lead to
chronic renal failure.
      Diet Modification: The diet must be planned to suit the patient’s kidney capacity.
      Normal intake of protein is planned when kidneys are able to excrete wastes. If proteins are
excreted in the urine, the protein losses must be covered by appropriate increase in the diet of proteins
of high biological value.
      When the blood urea nitrogen rises with the worsening of kidney function, the protein in the diet
must be reduced to 30-40 g or less. At the same time, the energy intake through carbohydrate and fat
must be enough to prevent tissue breakdown.
      If there is edema, sodium intake needs to be restricted. Due to poor reabsorption of the nutrients,
loss of iron can lead to anemia. Hence iron supplements are needed.
318                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                                 Table 30.1 Diet in Glomerulonephritis

                                 Calories – 1800, Protein – 40 g, Na – 800 mg

                                                           Protein          Calories         Na
             Food Groups           No. of Exchanges
                                                             (g)             (kcal)         (mg)
       Cereals                             9                  18               900            45
       Legumes and Pulses                  2                  11               200            20
       Milk, toned                         2                  10               200            48
       Egg / chicken / fish                ½                   3                40          10 - 65
       Vegetables A                        2                  —                 —             20
       Vegetables B                        2                   2                60            20
       Fruit                               2                  —                100            20
       Fat                                 2                  —                180            —
       Sugar                               5                  —                100            —
                                         Total                43              1780         183–238

                                                   Meal Plan

       Meal                                         Menu Items                              Drink
       Breakfast                         1 Egg, 2 toasts, orange/mosumbi                  tea/coffee
       Lunch                    1c rice, 1 chapati, 1s french beans, 1s dal, ½ s dahi
       Tea                    1s upma/pohe, 1 banana                                         tea
       Supper                 1c rice, 2 phulkas, 1c dal, 1s ridge gourd bhaji, ½c dahi


Nephrotic Syndrome
      This includes lipoid nephrosis, a rare condition, which affects children. It may also be due to
progression of chronic glomerulonephritis or be related to toxins of streptococci.
      There is a degeneration of kidney tissue, which permits protein loss through the filtrate. Large
amounts of proteins (albumins) are thus lost through the urine from the body.
      In the beginning, there is swelling of eyelids and legs due to fluid retention in the body. Loss of
albumin in urine leads to low serum albumin values, at the same time, cholesterol level in the blood
increases. In this rare disease, mortality is high.
      Diet Modifications: Diet treatments must rectify edema, excessive protein loss and malnutrition
(anemia, etc.)
        • Protein allowance is increased to 2-3g/kg for children and 75-100g for adults, provided
           through high quality proteins (Table 30.2). High protein intake may sometimes hasten
           worsening of renal condition. Hence some authorities recommend 1.6 to 1.8g/kg of protein
           of high biological value. High protein supplements with low sodium content are useful.
        • Energy allowance must be adequate to permit use of protein from the diet for tissue synthesis.
           About 50-60 calories/kg body weight need to be given.
Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases                                                                    319

        • Sodium level needs to be kept at about 500 mg to prevent edema. Low sodium sources of
            vegetables and fruits are given in table 30.3.
        • Dietary fat and cholesterol may be limited to control hyperlipidemias.
      The patients may not have good appetite and may need encouragement from attending relatives
and dietitian to consume the diet presented completely. Appetizing and acceptable preparations will help
the patient to enjoy the diet planned. A diet for nephrotic syndrome is given in table 30.2 .

                      Table 30.2 Diet for a Patient with Nephrotic Syndrome
                               Wt. of the patient – 45 kg Calories 50 – 60/kg
                              Calories – 2400, Protein 85 g, Na – 500 mg/day

                                                        Proteins         Calories            Na
          Food Groups            No. of Exchanges
                                                          (g)             (kcal)            (mg)
       Cereals                           10                 20              1000              50
       Legumes and Pulses                 2                 11              200               20
       Milk, toned                        4                 20              400               96
       SMP                              50g                 19              180              260
       Fish/chicken/duck                  2                 10              100            30 – 60
       Vegetables A                       2                —                 —                20
       Vegetables B                       2                 4                60               10
       Fruits                             2                —                100               10
       Sugar                              6                —                120               —
       Oils, fats                         2                —                180               —

                                        Total               84             2,340           496–516


Acute Kidney Failure
      Acute kidney failure is sudden, often reversible in a patient who had limited function earlier. When
kidneys are not able to carry out their normal function of maintaining the internal chemical environment
of the body by filtering out the wastes and excreting them, it is known as renal failure. It often develops
due to gradual destruction of renal tissue by the disease or may occur suddenly as in nephrosis or
obstruction of the tract.
      When the glomerular filtration rate rapidly drops to less than 20 ml/minute, there is a fast rise in
the serum urea and creatinine. When the rate drops further to 10 ml/minute or less, an excess of urea
and other nitrogenous wastes appear in the blood, which are symptoms of uremia. Simultaneously,
there is inability to urinate, with urine output decreasing to less than 100 ml/day. At this stage, the
patients may suffer from drowsiness, weakness, fatigue or may have headache, itching or blurred
vision. Acute renal failure leads to death in one-fourth of the cases. The percentage increases to half, if
the patient is over 75 years or there is associated trauma.
      Dialysis has proved to be a boon for such patients. It is instituted until kidney function is regained.
320                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                     Table 30.3 Low Sodium sources of Vegetables and Fruits

                  Sodium Content                                   Vegetables
                 1. Less than 5 mg/100 g EP              Bitter gourd (green), bottle gourd.
                                                         brinjal, french beans, onion stalks,
                                                         parwar, ridge gourd, onions
                 2. 5 to 11 mg/100 g EP                  Pumpkin, ladies finger (bhendi), peas,
                                                         cucumber, colocasia, potato, sweet
                                                         potato, tapioca (dried chips), yam,
                                                         brussel sprouts
                 3. 12 – 15 mg/100 g EP                  Cabbage, green plantain.

                                                                     Fruits

                 4. Less than 6 mg/100 g EP              Amla, guava, orange, papaya,
                                                         peaches,      plums,        chiku,
                                                         pomegranates, tree tomato, phalsa.

                 5. 7 to 13 mg/100 g EP                  Pears, ripe tomato.

      Dietary Modifications: In the first 24-48 hours, food and liquid intake by mouth are restricted.
Glucose is given intravenously as oral intake is limited due to nausea, vomiting and lack of appetite.
Sometimes tube feeding or total parenteral nutrition (TPN) is used. Dialysis is essential when TPN is
used.
      A protein free diet may be given before a patient is put on dialysis. Another approach is to give
glucose with essential amino acids orally, by tube feeding.
      The fluid allowance is 500 ml to make up for insensible water losses plus the urine output. More
fluid is provided if there is vomiting, diarrhea, fever, etc. to prevent dehydration.
      Energy intake should be enough to prevent catabolism. 20-40g protein is given with gradual
increase to normal levels with improvement in kidney function. The serum electrolytes and urine
output are constantly monitored so that appropriate diet and fluid intake adjustments can be made.
      Diet is modified as the patient regains normal kidney function, in the recovery phase of the
ailment. A high-protein, high-calorie diet is needed by patients who have suffered tissue damage (Table
30.2). The recovery of kidney function may not be complete in some patients.

Chronic Renal Failure
      Gradual loss of kidney function is the beginning, but if it silently continues, the glomerular filtration
rate begins to reduce leading to chronic renal failure. Kidneys have a vast reserve capacity, which
allows them to support life through much of this progressive deterioration. When the glomerular filtration
rate (GFR) drops from normal 125 ml/minute to less than 30 ml/minute, dietary modification is initiated
      When the GFR reduces to 3 ml/minute, dietary control is not sufficient and dialysis or kidney
transplant is necessary to save the life of the patient.
      Dietary Modifications: The diet planning takes into account the stage of the disease, its causes,
blood levels of urea and electrolytes, nutritional status, other diseases occurring and if the patient is on
Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases                                                                321

dialysis. The patients awaiting dialysis have a more severely restricted diet compared to those who are
on dialysis.
      Energy: To prevent tissue breakdown and release of nitrogen and potassium into circulation, an
intake of 1900-2000 cal/day is indicated. Main sources of energy are carbohydrates and fats. Their
metabolic end products do not pose a problem for the kidneys, as these are excreted through lungs
(CO2), sweat glands (water) and bowel (semisolid residue).
      Protein: Protein intake is reduced to reduce work of kidneys of excreting end products of
protein metabolism ( namely, urea, creatinine, uric acid, sulfate and organic acids) in the urine. Most of
the protein (65 to 75 per cent) in the diet should be of high biologic value (Table 30.4).
                       Table 30.4 Diet for a Patient with Chronic Renal Failure
                            30–40 protein, 1900 calories, 500 mg Na per day


       Food                     No. of Exchanges         Proteins          Calories        Na
                                                           (g)              (kcal)        (mg)


       Cereals                            8                  16               800          40
       Dals & Pulses                      1                   6               100          10
       Milk, toned                        1                   5               100          24
       Fish/chicken                      ½                    5                40        10–37
       Vegetables A                       2                  —                 —           30
       Vegetables B                       3                  3*               150          20
       Fruits                             2                  —                100          15
       Sugar                             10                  —                200          —
       Oils, fats                         4                  —                360          —
                                        Total                35               1850        176
                                                Meal Plan**
      Meal                                           Items                               Drink
      Breakfast                      1 parantha / chapati-bhaji. banana                Tea/coffee
      Lunch                   1 ½ chapati, thick dal, rice ( ½ c ), ½ c buttermilk
      Tea                                1 s upma, orange/musumbi                         Tea
      Supper                  Rice (2s), Phulkas (2), cabbage, bhaji, egg curry

* Choose low protein containing vegetables, eg. Gourds and fruit vegetables
** Use 0.325 g salt in food preparation. Do not serve salt at the table.

      Minerals: Potassium and sodium intakes need to be restricted to avoid hyperkalemia, edema and
hypertension respectively. Phosphorus is often restricted to 600-1200 mg/day to prevent metabolic
acidosis.
322                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                    Table 30.5 Possible Meal Plan for Protein Controlled Diet
                                  (based on exchange system)

                                   Measure                                Protein

                                                         20g        40g             60g     80g
      Breakfast
           Cereal                  1 Exchange             1           1              1       1
           Low prot. Bread         1 Slice                2          —              —       —
           Bread enriched          1 Slice                —           1              1       1
           Fruit                   1 Exchange             1           1              1       1
           Egg                     1 No.                  1           1              1
           Milk                    1 Cup                  ¼           ¼             ¼        1
      Lunch
           Bread/starch            1 Exchange             —           1              2       2
           Low prot. Bread         1 Slice                2           —             —       —
           Egg                     1                      1          —              —       —
           Vegetable, free         1 Exchange             —           1              1       1
           Milk                    1 Cup                  —           ¼             ½        1
           Low prot. Dessert       1 Serving              1           1              1       1
           Fruit                   1 Exchange             1           1              1       1
      Dinner
           Bread/starch            1 Exchange             1           1              2       2
           Low prot. Bread         1 Slice                1           1              1       1
           Dal                     1 Serving              —           1              1       1
           Vegetable, free         1 Exchange             —           1              1       1
           Vegetable- List 3       1 Exchange             —           1              2       2
           Fruit                   1 Exchange             —           1              2       2
           Milk                    1 Cup                  ¼          —              —        1
           Low prot. Dessert       1 Serving              1          —              —       —

      Supplements of calcium, iron and B vitamins need to be given, as restricted diets are low in these
nutrients. Calcitrol may also be given as supplement as the kidney is not able to produce vitamin D
hormone.
      Fluid is restricted when urine output is low. The total fluid intake is equal to the volume of urine
output plus about 500 ml for insensible losses. The fluid intake includes water present in foods and
beverages also. Thus 100 ml of milk provides 87 ml, 100 g of fruits and vegetables provide 80-90ml of
water.
Diet and Nutrition in Kidney Diseases                                                                  323


Dialysis
      Dialysis is used in acute and chronic renal failure for a short or long periods. It does not correct
metabolic problems and there is need for modification of diet as also supplements. Most patients with
end-stage renal disease lose whatever kidney function is left, after beginning dialysis.
      In hemodialysis, the patient’s blood circulates outside the body through a semipermeable membrane
bathed in dialyzing fluid and removes nitrogenous wastes from it. Three times a week, the patient has
to undergo dialysis for 4 hours each time. Some serum amino acids and water soluble vitamins are lost
in the dialysate.
      Between dialysis, dietary control helps to maintain acceptable levels of nitrogenous waste products,
potassium, sodium and fluids in the blood. Supplementation of water soluble vitamins are lost in the
dialysate.

Kidney Transplant
      When both kidneys of a patient fail, kidney transplant provides a functioning kidney, which
permits him/her to lead a normal life.
      As in any other surgery, postoperatively, dietary progression is from a liquid to solid diet, which
is planned to individual tolerance. To help the patient to recover, a high protein, low carbohydrate and
sodium restricted diet follows, which counteracts the effects of drugs used in treatment. Reduced fat
may also help control hyperlipidemias, while restriction of simple sugars prevents hyperglycemia.

Kidney Stones
      Kidney stones are also known as renal calculi, urolithiasis, or nephrolithias. These may be
found in the bladder, kidney, ureter or urethra. Deposition of varied sizes crystals in an organic matrix
leads to the formation of these stones.
      As stones of varied sizes form, they normally move towards the ureter. Small smooth stones pass
into the ureter, but large ones can block the ureter opening which impedes normal flow and causes
intense pain. The pain may be accompanied by nausea, vomiting, even chills and fever. Only 10 per
cent stones are large and cause such reactions.
      Dietary correlation to kidney stone formation is not easy to prove. They occur in conjunction
with other diseases, which infect or weaken the urinary tract. Excessive excretion of calcium (e.g. in
osteoporosis) and concentration of urine may promote stone formation.
      Low intake of water, leading to concentration of urine may lead to the formation and deposition of
crystals in the renal tract. Calcium salts (with carbonate, phosphate, ammonium), magnesium oxalate,
sulfate etc. account for 90 per cent of the stones; uric acid and rarely cystine or xanthine account for
the rest.
      Diet Therapy: Therapy is planned on the basis of the predominant component of the stone.
      A very liberal fluid intake of 2500 to 3000ml per day is recommended to avoid formation of
concentrated urine from which salts get precipitated out as stones. This recommendation is universal
and does not depend on the type of stone.
      Calcium Stones: If stones are not preceded by other disease (are idiopathic) dietary calcium
intake is reduced to 600mg/day or less. Fiber in the diet is increased to bind excess calcium. If water
supplies are high in calcium, it may be necessary to use special filter to eliminate it, before using it for
drinking and cooking.
324                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Oxalate Stones: A diet low in oxalate is indicated. Ascorbic acid content of the diet should be
normal. Dietary fat should be reduced to 50g/day or less if the patient suffers from steatorrhea.
      Uric acid Stones: Altered purine metabolism and sometimes gout may lead to the formation of
these stones. A diet reduced in purines is prescribed sometimes.
      Most of the small stones pass through the ureter. Those which are too large and obstruct function
and cause pain need to be removed surgically. A modern procedure (laproscopy) in which the stone is
broken into bits and flushed out, has done away with the need for painful surgery.

Dietary Modifications
     It is important to note that dietary modifications cannot dissolve existing stones but it can be
helpful in preventing development of new stones.
     Some of the steps one can take to prevent formation of kidney stones are:
      (i) Drink lots of water. Kidneys filter harmful substances out of the blood and flush them out
           of the body via the ureters. In the presence of fluid, the waste dissolves and flows out from
           the body. But when the body is dehydrated, the waste products solidify in crystalline form
           and can react with each other to form a stone of calcium oxalate or uric acid.
           Fluids are the most important input in the prevention of kidney stones. The aim is to drink
           enough water to produce two liters of urine per day. Those living in hot climate, will need
           additional two to four glasses of water per day.
           You can check the colour of the urine, which is an indicator of its concentration. If it is dark
           yellow, the crystals are not dissolving, and you should increase your fluid (mainly water)
           intake.
     (ii) Increase your potassium intake. In scientific studies, it was observed that those, who ate
           a lot of fruits and vegetables rich in potassium reduced their risk of developing kidney stone
           by 50 per cent. Bananas, citrus fruits, potatoes are good sources of potassium.
    (iii) Reduce intake of meat. The risk of kidney stones is reduced if intake of meat is reduced
           to a serving of three ounces per day.

Study Questions
      1.   List the functions of kidney.
      2.   Discuss the causes of kidney disease.
      3.   What is glomerulonephritis? What changes in diet are made to meet it?
      4.   List low sodium sources of vegetables and fruits.
      5.   What are kidney stones? What steps can one take to reduce their incidence?
                                                                                     CHAPTER 31


                                Nutrition in Cancer


      The Nature of Cancer
      The Causes of Cancer
      Relationships of Food and Cancer
      The Effects of Cancer
      The Treatment of Cancer
      Nutritional Care of Cancer Patients



The Nature of Cancer
      Cancer is the cause of about 3 to 6 per cent of all deaths in India and its incidence is on the rise. (1).
In 2004, annual mortality due to cancer was reported to be 0.7 million. The incidence of the type of
cancer varies with sex and age. In Indian females, breast, cervix-uterine, oesophagel and gastrointestinal
cancers account for 30 per cent of all cancer deaths. In males, 31 per cent of all cancer deaths occur
due to oropharyngeal, lung, oesophegal and stomach cancers. Leukemias and pediatric malignancies
(lymphomas and osteo-sarcomas) occur in children.
      Cancer is characterized by abnormal cell growth. It can occur in any organ. In cancer, the genes
lose control of cell growth in some way and reproduction of cells is unstructured and excessive. The
abnormal growth leads to a developing mass called a tumor or neoplasm. Hence cancer is also called
neoplasia. Cancerous tumors are malignant, affecting the structure and hence the functions of organs.
More than 100 types of malignant forms of cancer are known. Cancer cells are said to metastasize
when they break away from their original site, move through the blood and spread at a new site. Cancer
does not always cause death, but the mortality rate of cancer patients is high. If it is detected at an early
stage of development, prompt treatment can cure or eradicate it. The study of cancer is called oncology
and a physician, who is a specialist in cancer is called an oncologist.

The Causes of Cancer
     The exact cause of cancer is not known, but several factors are thought to contribute to its
development. These include: heredity, viruses, environmental carcinogens and perhaps emotional stress.

(1) Ambiye, R.Y. et al. Diet, Nutrition and Cancer AFST(I) Newsletter, Bombay Chapter, p.26, Jan. 2005.
326                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Some families seem to have a genetic predisposition for cancer though it is not inherited. In such
cases, it is advisable to carefully avoid environmental carcinogens and be regular in medical checkups.
      Environmental carcinogens include some substances breathed in (tobacco smoke and asbestos),
radiation (from x-rays, sun or nuclear wastes), certain chemicals ingested in food and water and some
chemicals, which are in regular contact with the skin. Only a prolonged exposure to carcinogens leads
to cancer, not an occasional exposure.

Relationships of Food and Cancer
      There appear to be associations between food and cancer, both good and bad, though these have
not been proved. About fifty per cent of cancers may be related to diet. Cancers of the colon, rectum,
prostrate and breast are the ones which have been shown to be associated with diet.
      Healthy immune system is maintained by adequate intake of protein foods. Any damage to immune
system, such as malnutrition, may be a contributing factor in the development of cancer.
      On the positive side, diets high in fibre are thought to help to protect against colorectal cancer.
Intake of sufficient amounts of vitamin C-rich foods may protect against cancers of stomach and
esophagus. Intake of sufficient amounts of carotene and vitamin A rich foods may protect against
cancers of lung, bladder and larynx. Phytochemicals (substances that occur naturally in plant foods)
are thought to be anticarcinogenic agents. Flavonoids, phenols and indoles, which are abundantly
found in fruits and vegetables are examples of phytochemicals. Hence it is advisable to eat six or more
servings of fruits and vegetables. Legumes such as lentils, mung and other dried beans and dals contain
proteins, minerals and fibre. High intakes of these and soya foods are associated with decreased risk of
breast and colon cancer.
      However, excessive intake of protein and fats may be involved in colon cancer development.
      Omega-3-fatty acids protect the cell from cancer development, whereas monounsaturated fats
(MUFA) are neutral. Linoleic acid, an essential fatty acid, has been shown to be a causative factor of
cancer. Once cancerous cells are formed it promotes their proliferation. High intake of polyunsaturated
fats (PUFA) in the diet have been shown to increase the development of breast, colon, pancreas and
prostate cancer in animals. More research is needed to establish the role of fat and its degradation
products in the development of cancer.
      Nitrites in cured and smoked foods (bacon and ham), which can be changed to nitrosamines
(carcinogens) during cooking, are examples of substances in foods, which are thought to be carcinogenic.
Regular intake of these foods is associated with cancers of breast, uterus, prostate and colon. People,
who smoke and drink excessive amounts of alcohol, appear to be at greater risk of cancers of the
mouth, pharynx, esophagus than those who do not smoke and drink alcohol.
      When food is fried in the same oil continuously, the oil polymerises and these polymers have been
shown to be carcinogenic .
      Calcium intake up to 1200 mg/day seems to have a protective influence. So does drinking more
than five glasses of water per day.
      The most important principle is moderation. An occasional serving of bacon or buttered popcorn
or wine is not likely to cause cancer, but the regular excessive use of carcinogenic foods may contribute
to cancer. Vitamins that are thought to prevent cancer should be ingested in foods that naturally
contain them.
      Excessive intake of vitamin supplements can be harmful. For example, abnormally large amounts
of vitamin A can cause pain, hair loss, headaches and liver and skin problems.
Nutrition in Cancer                                                                                     327


         In the news
         Carrots and tomatoes may reduce ovarian cancer risk: Women who eat plenty of carrots,
   tomatoes, and other foods high in carotene and lycopene may reduce their risk of ovarian cancer.
   This was most apparent in post-menopausal women. Since carotene (which the body converts to
   vitamin A) and lycopene are antioxidants, women should get their carotenoids from foods and
   not from supplements. They should take at least five servings of carrots and one cup of tomato
   sauce per week.
                                (Source : Reuters Oct. 2001, Intl. J of Cancer 2001, 94:128-134)


The Effects of Cancer
       Unexplained weight loss is one of the first indications of cancer, because the tumor cells use the
nutrients the host has taken in for their own growth and development. As a result the host is famished,
feels weak and may lose appetite, which compounds the weight loss.
       The weight loss includes the loss of muscle tissue and hypoalbuminemia and anemia may
develop. In cancer patients, nutrient deficiency may affect the sense of taste and smell. These may
become abnormal. As a result, foods taste less sweet and more bitter than they would taste to healthy
persons.
       Decreased digestive secretions may reduce appetite of cancer patients and they may feel full
when they eat a small amount of food. Hyperglycemia can develop due to abnormal insulin production,
which may delay stomach’s emptying and dull the apetite. Some cancers can cause hypercalcemia. If
this is chronic, it can lead to formation of renal stones and damage kidney function. The location of a
tumor determines the effects of cancer on the host. For example, there is blockage in the gastrointestinal
tract causing malbsorption, when the tumor is in the esophagus or intestine. If the cancer is not treated,
the continued loss of appetite (anorexia) and weight loss will create a state of severe malnutrition and
body wasting (cachexia) and untimely death.

The Treatment of Cancer
      Three methods can be used to treat cancer. – chemotherapy, radiation, surgical removal or a
combination of these methods.
      Chemotherapy reduces the ability to regenerate the absorptive cells of the small intestine and
can cause hemorrhagic colitis. Both chemotherapy and radiation may cause nausea, vomiting and
diarrhea, which result in fluid and electrolyte imbalances. Both may also depress appetite. However, the
patient can get back to normal well-balanced diet after the therapy is over and these problems may
disappear.
      Radiation can affect a number of body functions adversely. It can change senses of taste and
smell; it can cause a decrease in salivary secretions and can reduce the absorptive tissue in the small
intestine. It can cause constipation or diarrhea. Decrease in salivary secretions can cause dry mouth
(xerostomia), difficulty in swallowing (dysphagia), tooth decay and even loss of teeth sometimes.
      Cancer surgery affects the function of the part of the body affected. The ability to chew and
swallow is affected in mouth surgery, the absorption is affected in gastric or intestinal surgery, resulting
in nutritional deficiencies.
328                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      However, these treatments have side-effects, which have adverse effects on the nutritional status
of the patient.

Nutritional Care of Cancer Patient
      A cancer patient needs a high-calorie, high-protein diet, as there is an increase in metabolic rate
due to cancer, need to rebuild damaged tissues and to replace nutrients lost to the cancer. Patients on
high-calorie, high-protein diet tolerate the side effects of therapy and higher doses of drugs better than
those who cannot eat normally. Patients, who can maintain their weight or minimize its loss have a
greater chance of responding to treatment and thus their recovery.
      Though their nutritional needs are high, anorexia is a major problem for cancer patients. It is very
difficult to overcome because patients develop strong dislike to foods, which are side effects of
chemotherapy. Therefore chemotherapy needs to be scheduled two to three hours before or after
meals. Parenteral or enteral nutrition may be necessary in the early stages to meet the needs of the
patient.
      The appetite and absorption is improved after chemotherapy. So the nutritional status of the
patient improves in the period between chemotherapy treatments.
      Diet plans for cancer patients require special attention. The plans need to be made in consultation
with the patient, taking care to include favourite foods, prepared in familiar ways and served attractively.
      Those with a chewing problem, may find soft diet suitable. Those with diarrhea may respond to
a low-residue diet.
      Cancer causes a hypermetabolic state, which increase energy demands. Though energy needs
vary from one patient to another, 45-50 kcal/kg body weight may be recommended. Carbohydrates and
fats must provide this energy and spare protein for tissue building and immune system. Protein needs
vary from 1.0 to 1.2 g/kg for those with good nutrition and 1.3 to 2.0 g/kg for malnourished patients.
      Sufficient fluids need to be ingested to help the kidneys eliminate the metabolic wastes and the
toxins from drugs.
      Patients may tolerate several small meals than three large ones. If possible, supplement meals
with high-calorie, high-protein liquid foods as snacks.
      To sum up, abnormal cell growth is a character of cancer. It can occur in any body tissue.
Energy needs are high due to the hypermetabolic state and the demands of tumor. At the same time, the
patient suffers from anorexia. It causes severe wasting, anemia and several metabolic problems.
Chemotherapy, radiation and surgery are used to treat cancer singly or in combination as needed. Due
to the illness and anorexia, it is difficult to improve the nutritional status of the patient. Parenteral or
enteral nutrition may be necessary in the early stages to start the process of recovery.

Study Questions
      1. What is cancer? What are the factors which contribute to its development?
      2. Discuss relationships of food and cancer.
      3. Discuss treatment of cancer including nutritional care of the cancer patient.
                                                                                CHAPTER 32


   Nutrition in Immune System Dysfunction,
                                AIDS and Allergy


     Introduction
     Non-specific Immunity: Primary Defences
     Specific Immunity
     Nutritional Deficiency and Immune Function
     Immune System Disorders
     Human Immuno-deficiency Virus
     Transmission of HIV Infection
     Advancement of HIV to AIDS
     Nutrition in HIV Infection
     Allergy: Respiratory System, Asthma, Skin, Digestive Tract
     Food Allergy Diagnosis, Treatment, Patient Education



Introduction
      The ability of the body to resist infection is known as immunity. Natural immunity is the sum total
of the defenses of the body, which enables the body to resist infection under normal conditions. This
phenomenon explains why most of us resist the agents of disease that we are exposed to every day.
The various types of immunity are depicted in Fig. 32.1. One can observe from the table that all types
of immunity are closely related.

Non-Specific Immunity – Primary Defences
      Physical Barriers prevent the entry and action of microbial invaders in the body. The first
response to microbial invaders is non-specific and does not need to recognise the invader.(antigen).
Physical barriers are the primary defences of the body against infection. Intact skin and mucous
membranes prevent entry and action of microbial invaders, As we know mucous membranes line the
respiratory, alimentary and genitourinary tracts. Additional non-specific resistances include visceral
movements, the complement system.
330                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




                                     Figure 32.1 Types of immunity

       Cilia are hair-like structures on the lining of cells of the nose and windpipe (trachea), which help
to cough up the microbes, that may have entered there. Mucus produced in the nose and sinuses traps
dust and helps destroy bacteria. Secretions such as sweat, mucus, tears and intestinal secretions
mechanically flush away foreign substances.
       Nonspecific resistances also include the complement system, interferon (protein formed when
cells are exposed to virus), iron-binding proteins (e.g., lactoferrin and transferrin) and phagocytes
(granulocytes, monocytes and macrophages).
       Complement System is a group of proteins, which interact with each other in a step-wise
progression to bring about antigen-antibody reactions. If the complement system becomes defective,
the susceptibility to bacterial infections is increased.
       Phagocytes ingest and destroy microorganists. Phagocytes include granulocytes and macrophages
all of which circulate. Macrophages mean those which eat up (kill) bacteria and viruses. Macrophages
ready the invading agent (antigen) so that the T and B lymphocytes can recognize it and act on it.
Phagocytes and complement release digestive enzymes which contain lysosomes. Lysosomes destroy
antigen.

Specific Immunity
      Cell-mediated and humoral are two types of specific immunity. Cell-mediated occurs inside or
on the surface of the cell. Humoral immunity occurs in blood and fluid outside the cell.
      Cell-mediated Immunity: Lyphocytes called T-cells are the main agents of cell-mediated
immunity. T cells get activated on contact with antigen.
Nutrition in Immune System Dysfunction, AIDS and Allergy                                               331

      Our resistance to fungal and viral infections and regulation of humoral immunity is due to cell-
mediated immunity. Hence greater understanding of T-cells can help prevent and treat diseases.
      Organ transplants, which are foreign tissues may be rejected due to the body’s T-cells recognizing
these as such. Hence immunorepressive drugs are given to a patient receiving organ transplant to
suppress action of their T-cells.
      Humoral Immunity involves lymphocytes called B cells. There are a variety of B-cells. B-cells
specific to the invading cell produce plasma cells, which in turn produce a variety of immunoglobulins.
(Ig-antibodies). These antibodies bind the antigen and form a complex. The complex cells are destroyed
by interaction with complement proteins. The destroyed cells are ingested by macrophages.
      Most viral and some bacterial infections occur, when there is a deficiency of B-cells.

Nutritional Deficiency and Immune Function
      The organs which are centres of immune function, namely thymus, spleen, lymph nodes, atrophy
in protein-energy malnutrition. As a result T-cells numbers and phagocytosis is reduced. In the absence
of protective mechanisms in malnourished persons, infectious diseases are usually more virulent. For
example, measles is frequently a life-threatening disease in a malnourished child, though it is a mild
disease in a healthy child.
      Those persons, who are at risk due to lack of natural immunity include :
           Infants, the elderly,
           food faddists as also hospitalised patients,
           alcoholics and drug users.
      Infants are protected by antibodies received in the womb from their mother, though immunity is
low at birth. Breast milk also provides IgA (immunoglobulin A). Low birth weight infants may have
suboptimal immune function and thus are prone to get infections easily.
      Elderly. There is progressive decline in immune function with age. There is decrease in lean body
mass with age. Nutrient levels in blood fall and poor nutrition is a problem at times. Thus the malnutrition
coupled with decreased immunity leads to a greater incidence of infections, degenerative diseases and
cancer.
      Food Faddists. Food faddists may take deficient diets, self-treat themselves with unnecessary
supplements, creating imbalance in nutrients (too much of some and too little of other nutrients). Such
regimen may affect immune function adversely and make them susceptible to infectious diseases.
      Effect of Specific Nutrients on Immunity. Cell-mediated and humoral immunities are decreased
by any nutrient deficiency or imbalance, which reduces production or maturation of T-cells or B-cells,
depresses DNA synthesis, cell division or replication.
      Energy. In animal experiments , it is observed that animals fed diets adequate in all nutrients, but
with moderate restriction in energy, live longer, have fewer tumors and exhibit slower decrease in
immune function with age. Humans are likely to exhibit a similar trend. The incidence of respiratory
infections is higher in obese than normal weight people.
      Protein Synthesis is an essential prerequisite of normal immune function. Cell-mediated immune
function is depressed in kwashiorkor (a protein deficiency disease).
      The quality and quantity of protein are both important in immune response. Increased incidence
of infections is observed, when the diet does not meet the essential amino acid needs of the individual.
332                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Immune System Disorders
       Autoimmune Diseases: When the body’s immune defenses attack the body itself, the antibodies
produced attack its cells and organs. These antibodies are responsible for autoimmune diseases, which
include insulin dependent diabetes mellitus, rheumatoid arthritis etc.
       Secondly the absence or insufficiency of a component/s of immune system levels leads to these
disorders. Some infants have these defects from birth. Some patients may develop as part of disease in
an advanced stage of cancer and/or as side effects of the treatments.
       The third type is caused by a virus (the human immuno-deficiency Virus – HIV), which destroys
body’s specific cell-mediated defense system. (a helper T-cell and the T-4 cell). Hence it is called
acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS). As it affects vital body systems (thymus, spleen,
lymph nodes, etc.) it leads to a variety of infections.
       Ordinary harmless organisms cause these infections due to the body’s loss of defense mechanism.
It is important to take precautions to prevent food-borne infections as persons with AIDS are at high
risk.

Human Immuno-deficiency Virus
      As you may recall, a virus is a microscopic parasite that attacks and infects various tissues of our
body. It gets its nourishment from our tissues and multiplies countless times causing a variety of
ailments.
      There are many viruses that infect humans. Some cause only mild illness, for example, those
which are responsible for causing cold. There are other viruses, which are deadly; the Human
Immunodeficiency Virus (HIV) is one of the deadly ones.
      Our blood contains T cells which are white cells, which protect our body from infections. HIV
invades the T cells, impairing the normal function of the T cells, which is to protect the body from
other microorganisms present in the body. Persons, who have a healthy immune system, are thus
protected from invaders by the T cells.
      HIV positive persons are those who are infected by the HIV virus. If not treated effectively in the
early stages, HIV infection ultimately progresses to an Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome (AIDS),
which is incurable and fatal.

Transmission of HIV Infection
      So far there is no cure for HIV infection, but it can be prevented. It can affect anyone of any age
and sex, who is exposed to it. It is not transmitted through casual contact such as shaking hands. It is
transmitted through body fluids such as:
        • sexual contact
        • by tranfusion of contaminated blood
        • by the use of contaminated needles during ear piercing, tattooing, acupuncture, or injection
           of illegal drugs.
        • By infected mothers to their fetuses on pregnancy or to their infants during breast feeding.
      Advancement from HIV to AIDS: This occurs in three stages. Soon after exposure to HIV, the
body produces antibodies in an attempt to destroy the virus. Some persons may have symptoms like
mild ‘flu, others may have no symptoms for a few months to even ten years. At this stage, the person
will know that he/she is HIV-positive only if tested.
Nutrition in Immune System Dysfunction, AIDS and Allergy                                               333

      In the first dormant stage, the virus, which is incubating, multiplies in various parts e.g. tonsils,
adenoid glands and spleen and destroys the T cells. If a person suspects that he/she is exposed to HIV,
early detection helps to start treatment, which can prolong life, as the treatment may delay the action of
the virus. Good nutrition at this stage helps to increase body’s ability to delay action of the virus.
      In the second stage, infected persons, who are undetected and therefore not treated, suffer from
damage to their immune system. Infections occur, which may result in a variety of symptoms such as
fatigue, headache, oral infections, cough, sore throat, fevers, shortness of breath, diarrhea, weight
loss, skin rashes, night sweat, etc.
      In the third stage, HIV infection leads to AIDS (Acquired Immune Deficiency Syndrome). It is
evident from a very low T-cell count, which results in the body’s inability to fight infections. At this
stage, other parasites invade (e,g, T.B.) and in the absence of immunity, the body succumbs.

Nutrition in HIV Infection
      A healthful, nutritious diet ensures a healthy immune system, which may delay the progression of
HIV infection to AIDS.
      When a person is diagnosed as HIV positive, it is important to assess the nutritional status of the
person. At this early stage, any unhealthful dietary habits can be corrected with a dietitian’s guidance
and the importance of meeting future nutritional needs emphasised to help the action of the body to
resist the action of the virus.
      As the condition progresses, patients may begin to suffer some of the problems listed above. The
metabolic rate, nutrient and energy needs increase due to infections, while the appetite and ability to
absorb nutrients may decrease. Medicines given may cause nausea and reduce the appetite. Taste may
change, swallowing may be painful due to oral infection. These difficulties may result in malnutrition,
such as protein-energy malnutrition and hence loss of weight.
      To improve the appetite of the patient, there are several things the dietitian can do, such as:
               Offer soft food,
               Serve frequent small meals,
               Offer food the patient tolerates,
               Add sugar and flavourings to improve acceptability of liquid.supplements,
               Avoid extremely hot or cold foods, spicy or acidic foods,
               Give medicines after meals,
               Talk to the patient to help him/her unburden worries about family, friends and finances.

Allergy
      Allergy is hypersensitivity to certain substances or conditions. The allergic person may have
distressing symptoms from what she/he breathes, eats or touches. To the allergic person a summer
day with its pollen grains means hay fever or asthma. A person allergic to a particular food may have
stomach pains, eczema or skin rashes and/or migraine headaches, if she/he eats it. A person allergic to
a particular dye may develop an intense itching, rash on even a slight contact with the dyed cloth.
      About 10 to 20 per cent of the population suffer from allergy. The allergic person produces
antibodies, which combine with foreign material such as pollen or food protein leading to an antigen-
antibody reaction with release of mediators such as histamine and prostoglandins. These mediators
injure the body cells and cause illnesses. Such illnesses are called allergies.
334                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Respiratory System: The linings of the nose, the windpipe and the bronchial tubes are affected
by a variety of substances such as pollens of ragweed and grass, mold spores, house dust, dust from
feathers, animal hair, mites from pillows, bed linen etc.. These result in allergies of the respiratory
system.
      Asthma: The lining of the nose continues into the bronchial tubes. Asthma in most cases is an
extension of nasal allergy into bronchial tubes. About 40 per cent patients who have nasal allergy
develop asthma . As the substances that cause swelling and cause increased secretions affect bronchial
tubes, the passage becomes narrower, gets plugged with thick mucus. These cause difficulty in breathing
and induce coughing attacks, the main symptoms of asthma ( meaning ‘breathless’).
      Skin: Two types of allergies affect skin – eczema and hives. Some materials, which affect
almost everyone are poison ivy and poison oak or sumac. These materials can produce severe blistering
rashes due to allergy in any person following sufficient exposure.
      Many other substances also affect skin and produce less severe rashes, which may cause itching
and redness in the affected areas. These include dyes (used to dye hair or clothes), chemicals in
creams, shampoos and cosmetics, furniture polishes, detergents, mercury and nickel compounds and
many others.
      Allergic eczema may be caused by substances taken internally. In mild attacks, the face, neck,
back of elbows/knees are involved; in severe cases, rash may cover the entire skin.
      Hives (urticaria) are temporary swellings starting below the skin surface. The most common
causes of hives are foods and drugs.
      The Digestive Tract: Foods are the most common cause of allergic symptoms in the gullet,
stomach or intestines; while some drugs may also cause allergy. The symptoms may appear within few
seconds to several hours after the intake of food. The symptoms of gastrointestinal allergy vary from
mild discomfort (bloating and constipation or diarrhea) to severe abdominal pains. The gastrointestinal
symptoms may begin in the area first exposed like the mouth, gums, lips, tongue and pharynx, which
may itch, swell and burn.

Food Allergy Diagnosis
      Many steps are involved in assessment and diagnosis of a food allergy.
      Assessment: In the diet history, symptoms and their timing, suspected foods and the amounts
eaten to produce a reaction as also family history of allergies is recorded. The cause may be a common
food or foods or a non-food. Anthropometric measurements are recorded to evaluate growth and
development in the child. Nutritional assessment can help to detect persons at risk of malnutrition.
      Diary of Food Intake and Symptoms is kept for 2 weeks. It helps to identify food causing
allergy and also gives an idea of nutritional adequacy of the diet.
Treatment
       To treat any allergy requires finding causes as indicated above. A very careful diet study is
necessary with tests in which suspected foods are eliminated or purposely tried to observe their effect.
Intelligent observation is essential, in which the patient’s patience and physician’s skill play important
roles. The only effective treatment is to avoid the substances causing the allergy.
       For infants, who are not breast-fed and are allergic to cow’s milk, casein hydrolysate formulas
are used.
Nutrition in Immune System Dysfunction, AIDS and Allergy                                              335

      Persons, who have allergy to foods, should be educated about cross-reactivity, that is allergy to
the foods from the same group or botanical family. Thus a person who is allergic to groundnuts may
also be allergic to other beans such as soybeans.
      Patient education: Patient’s meal pattern must fit in with their family pattern. Nutritional adequacy
must be achieved. If one is allergic to citrus fruits, other sources of ascorbic acid must be included in
the diet.
      Patients need to be educated to read food labels and avoid those containing foods, which they are
allergic to.
      While eating out it is best to select foods, which are free from the offending food. While minute
amounts may produce adverse reactions, the person, should wear a medical alert locket indicating the
allergen(s) and carry an epinephrine kit to be used if the offending food is eaten by mistake or
unknowingly. The injection of epinephrine can give great relief from an allergic reaction.

Study Questions
      1. What is non-specific immunity?
      2. Write short notes on: Cell-mediated immunity, humoral immunity, auto-immune diseases,
         HIV, transmission of HIV.
      3. Discuss role of nutrition in HIV investigation.
      4. What is allergy? Which systems are affected by allergy? How is it treated?
                                                                                 CHAPTER 33


    Nutrition Support in Metabolic Disorders


     Introduction
     Metabolic Disorders Benefited by Nutrition Support
     Eight Approaches to Therapy of Metabolic Disorders
     Metabolic Disorders Involving Amino Acids
        Phenylketonuria, Treatment
        Maple Syrup Urine Disease
        Galactosemia, Nutrition Support
     Endocrine Disorders : Hypothyroidism, Hyperthyroidism



Introduction
      In 1990 over 4900 metabolic disorders were catalogued. About 250 of these have a defined
biochemical basis. These disorders result from variation in the structure of enzymes or protein molecules.
The amino acid sequences of enzymes, which are proteins, and their quantity are decided by genes.
About 30% of our population is heterozygous for common alleles, as suggested by the extent of normal
variation in genes. Relatively rare traits, which result in disease, are produced by mutations of genes.
The frequency of occurrence of mutant genes varies in populations. For example, maple syrup urine
disease (MSUD) occurs in about one in 250,000 newborns worldwide, but in an inbred Mennonite
population, it occurs one in 176.
      Genetic disorders can affect the metabolism of proteins, carbohydrates, lipids, pyrimidines, minerals
and vitamins, depending on the metabolic pathway that is affected.
      To prevent irreversible changes, such as brain damage, in infants, population-wide nonselective
screening of newborns has been instituted for PKU, MSUD, galactosemia, homocystinuria and
tyrosinemia in UK and USA. In these disorders, speed in diagnosis and treatment is of the utmost
importance.

Metabolic Disorders Benefited by Nutrition Support
     In metabolic disorders accumulation, excess production or lack of normal substrates and
metabolic products, leads to toxic symptoms. In many of these, appropriate changes in the dietary
supply helps to alleviate the problem.
Nutrition Support in Metabolic Disorders                                                             337

       Identifying the affected persons before irreversible changes have occurred is a very important
step in optimum management of these disorders. Analysis of the amniotic fluid cells in the sixteenth to
eighteenth weeks of gestation can help to detect a number of genetic disorders. Such search for
genetic disease is done when there is a family history of inherited disease. Such tests help to prevent
inborn error such as congenital cataracts in galactosemia by removing lactose from mother’s diet.
Other metabolic disorders can be detected by analysis of blood, urine, etc. of susceptible infants.
       It must be noted that persons suffering from metabolic disorders benefit from nutrition support,
when it is given promptly after detection. In this chapter, only a few disorders will be discussed to
illustrte that early nutrition support can prevent irreversible, severe pathogenic problem.
       Eight approaches to therapy of metabolic disorders are discussed here. Selection of the method
depends on how the disease occurs. Several methods may be used in sequence or at the same time,
depending on the case.
        1. Correct the basic imbalance in metabolic reactions.
            For example, in phenylketonuria (PKU), which occurs due to phenylalanine hydroxylase
            deficiency, intake of phenylalanine is limited and tyrosine is supplemented.
        2. The excretion of accumulated metabolic products, which are overproduced, is enhanced.
            In gout, the blood uric acid levels are lowered by blocking renal reabsorption with use of
            drugs. Then the tissue deposits of uric acid are mobilised for use.
        3. Alternate metabolic pathways are provided to reduce accumulation of toxic precursors in
            blocked reaction. For example, in urea cycle defects, the accumulated ammonia is decreased
            by using nitrogen to form phenylacetyl glutamine from glutamine by giving curative amounts
            of phenylacetic acid.
        4. To reduce overproduction of reaction products by use of inhibitors. Thus in gout,
            overproduction of uric acid is inhibited by use of allopurinol.
        5. Products of blocked pathways are provided. Administration of pancreatic enzymes, when
            the normal secretion is blocked, helps to correct the digestive defect in cystic fibrosis.
        6. Altered enzyme proteins are stabilised. Appropriate intake of the co-factor vitamin B6 in
            homocystinuria or thaimine in MSUD increases intracellular coenzymes of these vitamins
            and hence the specific activity of the related enzymes.
        7. Deficient cofactors are replaced. Appropriate intake of specific vitamin precursor cures a
            number of vitamin dependent disorders, which occur due to blocks in production of their
            coenzyme.
        8. Genetic counseling to limit the frequency of inherited diseases. Genetic counseling can
            prevent marriages between high-risk individuals and thus reduce the birth of affected progeny.
       The main component of treating inherited disorders is nutrition management. In addition to dietary
restrictions, some amount of chemically tailored foods need to be used to correct imbalances in
metabolic relationships.

Metabolic Disorders Involving Amino Acids
      Amino acids are the building blocks of proteins. They have many functions in the body. Metabolic
disorders related to amino acids can occur due to defects in the way they are metabolised or their entry
into the cells. As these disorders lead to symptoms early in life, newborns are screened for them
routinely in some countries.
338                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

       Phenyl ketonuria (PKU) was discovered in 1933. Prevention of mental retardation caused by it,
is a classic example of diet therapy.
       Of the amino acid disorders, phenyl ketonuria (PKU) will be discussed, as it is one of the few
causes of mental handicap for which reasonably effective treatment is available.
       In classic PKU, the activity of the enzyme phenylalanine hydroxylase is less than 1 per cent of
normal. This enzyme is present in the liver and converts excess phenylalanine to tyrosine, another
amino acid which is eliminated from the body. In 1 to 3 per cent cases with defective hydroxylation,
there is deficiency of the cofactor tetrahydrobiopterin, and in this rare condition, the brain damage is
not prevented by dietary treatment.
       Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid, which needs to be provided through food, as it cannot be
synthesized in the human body.
       Phenylketonuria (PKU) is a group of inherited disorders of phenylalanine metabolism. It is caused
by impaired phenylalanine activity. The symptoms occur at 3 to 6 months of age. These include
developmental delay, microcephaly, abnormal electroencephalogram, eczema, musty odour and
hyperactivity.
       In some countries (UK, USA) neonates are screened between 6th to 14th day after birth for PKU.
If diagnosed for PKU, treatment must be started immediately, to minimise the deleterious effects of the
disease.
       Treatment involves intake of controlled low-phenylalanine diet and regular monitoring of the
blood phenylalanine concentrations. Phenylalanine is an essential amino acid. If the amount in the diet
is insufficient, brain damage will occur. Hence the essential requirement must be ingested each day, a
part of the daily requirement being given with each meal. The synthetic protein substitute for PKU must
contain all the other essential amino acids needed. In addition, tyrosine becomes essential due to the
metabolic block. The recommended intake of all other nutrients is similar to that of other infants.
       The practical management of the PKU diet is very important. The levels of phenylalanine in the
blood should be monitored on specimens taken 3.5 to 4 hours after a feed or main meal, using a
micromethod (Guthrie), so that a capillary sample can be used. The suggested frequency of checking
is weekly during the first few months for infants, every two weeks after weaning to toddler age; every
3 – 4 weeks in preschool age and 4 weekly thereafter up to teens; after that, it may be every 2 – 3
months or less. Young children are likely sometimes to pilfer food or suffer from infections. At such
times the blood levels of phenylalanine needs to be checked and monitored.
       During infection, when a child is likely to eat poorly, a high-energy drink must be fed to avoid
breakdown of tissues, which may elevate phenylalanine level.
       Human milk has lower phenylalanine content than cow’s milk. Hence time-controlled breast-
feeding can be judiciously combined with use of protein substitute for a newly diagnosed infant.
       The sweetener, aspartame (nutrasweet/other brand name) contains phenylalanine and should not
be fed to phenylketonuric patients of any age. Manufactured foods containing these sweeteners also
need to be avoided from the PKU diet.
       A lady suffering from PKU, who wishes to have a child, must be advised to stick to low –
phenylalanine diet, much before conception and continue it through pregnancy. The blood levels must
be strictly controlled. Strict monitoring of the diet is essential to ensure adequate supply of energy,
phenylalanine and tyrosine and other nutrients to ensure appropriate growth of the fetus.
       When a mother with phenylketonuria, takes normal diet during pregnancy, her child has a high
Nutrition Support in Metabolic Disorders                                                               339

probability of suffering from severe congenital abnormalities such as mental retardation, microcephaly
and heart defects.
      Maple Syrup Urine Disease (MSUD) is a group of inherited disorders of the metabolism of the
branched-chain amino acids leucine, isoleucine and valine. Impairment of the branched-chain alpha-
keto acid dehydragenase occurs due to several different mutations.
      At birth infants with MSUD appear normal and well. But after intake of a protein-containing feed,
in severe cases seizures, aponea (suspension of breathing), occurs. If not treated death occurs within
ten days of birth.
      Hence it is urgent to screen susceptible newborns for MSUD, diagnose it and start appropriate
feeding promptly within the first week of life. This may consist of orogastric feeding of branched-
chain aminoacid-free protein and energy source, which should be started as soon as possible after
diagnosis is made. The aim is to initiate anobolism in the infant and prevent accumulation of neurotoxic
branched-chain aminoacids.
      For patients with 15% or more enzyme activity, protein intake of upto 1.5 g/kg/day may be
sufficient.
      The long-term diet therapy for MSUD involves maintenance of plasma concentrations of the
branched-chain amino acids within specified limits, to permit maximum intellectual development and
provide all other nutrients for optimal growth.
      The nutrition support is achieved by use of special medical foods and natural foods.

Galactosemia
      Lactose is the principal carbohydrate and energy source for infants and young children. Galactose
is found only as a component of lactose in natural foods and has a central metabolic role in human
nutrition.
      Galactose is formed by hydrolysis of lactose by lactase in the intestine.
      Galactose must be converted in the liver to glucose before it is used; this occurs through three
enzymatic steps. (Fig. 33.1).
      Galactosemia may occur due to deficient function of any of three enzymes (galactokinase, galactose-
1-phosphate uridyl transferase or UDP galacto-4-epimerase)
      Deficiency of galactokinase results in only cataracts.
      Galactosemia due to deficiency of galactose-1-P-transferase leads to accumulation of galactose-
1-P with progressive damage to the central nervous system, liver and renal tubule, if galactose restriction
is not started in the first few days of life. In most of the untreated infants, who survive, retarded mental
and physical growth occurs.
      Diagnosis of galctosemia is made by measuring galactose-1-P transferase activity in erythrocytes.
Recently a rapid ancillary method has been developed for prenatal diagnosis of galactosemia. In this
method, the amniotic fluid of a fetus is analysed for elevated level of galactitol by GC/MS, which
indicates impaired transferase activity.
      Nutrition support aims to prevent or improve symptoms and at the same time provide adequate
energy and other nutrients to ensure normal growth and development of the infant. Treatment consists
of the removal of all sources of lactose and galactose from the diet. It should be started from the first
week of life.
340                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy




 Figure 33.1 Metabolic blocks in galactose metabolism that lead to galactosemia. Genetic disorders of
                         catalyssed reactions are indicated by hatched bars

      Human milk contains 6 to 8 per cent lactose, cow’s milk 4 to 5 per cent lactose and infant
formulas 7 per cent lactose. These milks must be replaced by a formula low in galactose. Soya protein
isolate formulas have been found to be suitable, as it contains only 1.4 mg galactose per 100ml. in
oligosaccharide forms which are not hydrolysed in the human intestine.
      As the child grows, solid foods are added to the diet, after proper scrutiny to avoid lactose
containing foods. Even fermented dairy products and aged cheeses must be excluded from the diet, as
the conversion of lactose to lactic acid is not complete in these.
      Foods allowed - in galactose restricted diets are – cooked rice, chapaties, millet breads made
without milk addition, home-made cakes, puddings, pasta, all dals, legumes, nuts and seeds.
      Fats – Oils, nuts, shortenings.
      Sugar Beverages – carbonated drinks, fruit juices other than apple, grape, pear and papaya.
      Meat, fish, poultry – all primary products, not prepared ones, which contain milk or milk
products.
Nutrition in Cardiovascular Diseases                                                                        341

      Soups – clear soups, dal soups, vegetable soups made with vegetables allowed.
      Vegetables – asparagus, beets, cabbage, cauliflower, celery, corn, cucumbers, brinjal, lettuce,
ladies’ finger, potatoes, spinach and yams.
      Miscellaneous foods – Popcorn, pure sugar candy, jelly or marmalade, sugar, corn syrup, pickles,
pure spices and seasoning, molasses, honey.
      Foods excluded - All milk and milk products, all cheeses, commercial cakes, biscuits, custard,
puddings, ice cream, Omelets and souffles containing milk,
      Butter, cream, cream cheese, salad dressings containing lactose, non-dairy cream sweeteners
containing sodium/calcium caseinate, diet through life All canned or frozen fruits containing lactose,
      Apples, bananas, dates, figs, grapes, kiwi fruit, papaya, pears, persimmon, water melon, All
legumes, fermented soyabean products; hazelnuts, safflower seed kernel,
      Vegetables – bell peppers, broccoli, carrots, onions, peas, pumpkin, sweet potatoes, tomatoes,
      Miscellaneous – chewing gum, milk chocolates, some cocoas, toffee, peppermint, caramels,
certain drugs and vitamins and mineral preparations,
      Spice blends with added lactose, artificial sweeteners containing lactose.
      Galactosemic patients need to follow galactose-restricted diet to avoid damaging effects of
accumulated galactitol in lens, liver and kidneys.

Endocrine Disorders
      Hypothyroidism: Hypo, that is decreased secretion of thyroid hormones (thyroxine) by the
thyroid gland, leads to lowering of metabolic rate. Mild form of this disorder is common and affects
women more often than men. Overweight is common due to lower metabolic rate. Screening of
newborns helps to detect it and start treatment early.
      Severe hypothyroidism in adults is known as myxoederma. In this condition, the metabolic rate is
very much reduced. It results in weight gain, flabby muscles, lethargy, constipation and high blood
lipids. Severe lowering of metabolic rate in fetal life is known as cretinism and is discussed in Chapter
13.
      Treatment: A synthetic hormone is given to make up for the missing thyroid hormone. Dietary
fiber is increased to prevent constipation. A calorie restricted diet helps to maintain normal weight in
overweight patients.
      Hyperthyroidism: The metabolic rate is increased by 50 per cent due to excessive secretion of
the thyroid gland. As a result of increased metabolic rate, the appetite is increased resulting in hyperactivity,
nervousness, rapid heartbeat and loss of weight. The thyroid gland is enlarged; the eyes are prominent
and there is double vision. Liver glycogen is rapidly lost due to increased metabolism and there is tissue
wasting. Increased excretion of calcium and phosphorus may cause osteoporosis
      Treatment: A high calorie (4000 – 5000 kcal) and high protein (100 – 125 g) diet is required to
reverse the weight loss and tissue wastage until normal nutritional status is attained.
      Intake of snacks between meals helps to increase calorie intake and satisfy hunger. Multivitamin
mineral supplements are often given. Foods containing caffeine are avoided due to their stimulating
effect.
      To reduce the metabolic rate to normal, antithyroid drugs are used in most cases. Tranquilisers
are given to control cardiac and hyperactivity effects.
342                                               Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Study Questions
      1. What are the approaches to treat metabolic disorders?
      2. What is PKU? How can it be treated?
      3. Write short notes on: maple syrup urine disease, galactosemia, hypothyroidism.
                                                                                CHAPTER 34


       Nutrition in Stress, Burns and Surgery


     Definition
     Nutritional Requirements During Stress
     Burns: First, Second, Third and Fourth Degree
        Diet, Nutritional Assessment, Complications
        Nutritional Care of Patient with Burns
        Principles of Diet Therapy
     Accidental Injury
        Nutritional Care, Nutrients Needed
     Surgery: Nutrients Needed, Postoperative Diet
        Specific Surgery, Dietary Modifications
        Dumping Syndrome



Definition
       Stress can be mental, emotional or physical. Stress disturbs the normal steady state (homeostasis)
of the body. The extent of alteration in nutritional needs depends on the kind and extent of stress
imposed on the body.
       Emotional and mental stress is caused by anxiety, worries and tension due to a variety of
situations real and sometimes imaginary. The ability of individuals to handle stress varies.
       Emotional stress is one of the factors, which is found to cause some serious conditions such as
peptic ulcer, hypertension, cardiovascular disease and even cancer. Some of the common emotional
stress situations include sudden death of a near relative (child, mate, parent), losing a job, divorce,
financial problems, loss of limb in accident and even inability to cope with change such as job, location,
new family member etc.
       Physical stress includes burns or thermal injury and surgery.

Nutritional Requirements During Stress
     These are affected by three main factors:
     (a) the kind of stress – its severity, extent and period.
344                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

     (b) nutritional status of the patient
     (c) age of the patient.
     Food intake is often reduced due to stress; the body reserves are of great importance. Thus a
person in optimal nutrition state before stress can face the stress situation better as he/she can call on
the body reserves.

Burns
       Burns are one of the leading cause of accidental death in India. Burns or thermal injury impose an
unparalleled stress on the human body. The percentage of body surface area involved, the extent of
cellular damage and the area of the body affected would determine the severity of the burns.
       Burns are usually classified as follows:
       First Degree: If only the epidermis is affected, it is a first degree burn. It is important to provide
oral fluids to replace losses due to oozing and give medication for pain relief.
       Second Degree: Second degree burns are very painful as both epidermis and dermis are injured,
resulting in exposure of nerve endings. It is important to maintain aseptic and hygienic condition of the
affected part to avoid infection. The dietary treatment consists of ample fluids and provision of adequate
nutrients in the diet to ensure quick healing.
       Third Degree: In third degree burns, both epidermis and dermis are destroyed, nerve fibers are
also destroyed, resulting in lack of sensation and pain. When the layer of dead skin begins to separate,
pain is felt. If the burns involve more than ten per cent of the body surface, nutrition support is
essential to expedite recovery. This includes generous intake of fluids and adequate nutrient intake
through a well planned diet.
       Fourth Degree: In fourth degree burns, the subcutaneous tissue, muscle and bone are damaged.
There is need for constant, well planned nutrition support to help recovery.
       Burns interfere with normal functions of the skin; these include protection against infection,
control of body temperature, fluid balance, sense of touch and the beauty of looks.
       Diet: In the first few days after burn injury, it is very difficult to provide sufficient energy and
proteins because of the hypermetabolic state of the body. When the stress response becomes moderate,
it is easier to meet the needs for these nutrients.
       The ascorbic acid intake is increased up to 1 g per day and a zinc supplement is often given to
help wound healing process. Passive exercise helps to reduce protein loss. Use of layered dressings
help to maintain body temperature and thus reduce protein losses. However, the nutrients and electrolytes
lost through exudate or fluid leaking out of capillaries and urine needs to be replaced.
       Mode of Feeding: Initially parenteral nutrition is required, if peristalsis is absent due to shock.
When gastrointestinal function has returned, there is a transition made to oral feeding or tube feeding,
on the basis of the nature and site of burns. Special formulas are used for hypermetabolic states;
protein supplements or modular feedings can be utilized.
       Nutritional Assessment: As nutritional care plays a major part in recovery from burns, nutritional
assessment from time to time is essential to monitor the patient’s progress. The techniques used will be
decided by the state of the patient.
       Complications: One of the complications which occur are stress ulcers. Prevention of stress
ulcers involves several steps, which include – fluid replacement to prevent hypovolemia, oxygen therapy
Nutrition in Stress, Burns and Surgery                                                           345

to prevent hypoxia of gastric mucosa, nutrition support to nourish gastric mucosa and use of antacids
to maintain gastric pH above 5.

Nutritional Care of Patient with Burns
      Days 1-3 (Immediate shock period)
      Loss of enveloping skin surface and exposure of extracellular fluids leads to immediate loss of
interstitial water and electrolytes, mainly sodium and large protein depletion.
      Fluid therapy:
      (i) Colloid (protein) through blood and plasma transfusion
      (ii) Electrolytes, sodium and chlorine by use of saline solutions – lactated Ringer’s solution
      (iii) Water {dextrose solution) to cover additional insensible losses
      Recovery period (days 3 to 5): Intravenous therapy is discontinued and oral solutions such as
Holdene’s is used
      Holdene’s solution (oral fluid and electrolyte replacement)
      3 – 4 g (1/2 tsp) salt
      1.5 – 2 g (1 ½ tsp) baking soda (sodium bicarbonate)
      1,000 ml water
      + lemon juice for flavour and chill
      A careful check of fluid intake and output is essential with constant check of dehydration over
hydration.
      Secondary Feeding Period (6–15 days): Optimal nutritional therapy necessary to
      (a) make up for tissue destruction in which protein and electrolytes are lost
      (b) due to continued nitrogen losses due to tissue catabolism
      (c) due to increased metabolic demands of infection (extra calories + B vit.), fever and tissue
             regeneration (protein + vit.C)
      (d) to have optimal tissue health necessary for subsequent grafting to be successful.

Principles of Diet Therapy
      A high protein, high calorie and high vitamins diet is needed to ensure rebuilding of tissues
damaged/destroyed and catabolised. The protein requirement varies from 150 – 400 g/day.
Simultaneously the calorie need varies from 3,500 – 5,000cal/day. Intake of high carbohydrate foods
is suggested. The need for vitamins is very high to ensure recovery. The recommended vitamin C
intake is 1 – 2 g. per day. There is a need for increased intake of thiamine, riboflavin and niacin to
metabolize the extra carbohydrates and protein in the diet.
      Intake record – A careful record of protein and calories in the amount of food consumed is a
necessary tool for planning care.
346                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      A diet plan to be followed in recovery period is given below.

                                                 Diet Plan

                      Breakfast                                   Lunch and Dinner
                      Egg                                         Chapati 2
                      Bread + Butter                              Dal
                      Bananas                                     Rice
                      Milk                                        Dahi
                      In between                                  Vegetables
                      Buttermilk, custard,
                      Dahi + roasted methi powder
                      Milk + milk powder + flavour


Accidental Injury
      A number of accidental injuries lead to physical stress. These include vehicular accidents, stab
wounds or other accidental injury. These result in pain, shock with possibility of loss of blood, fluids
and/or electrolytes. If there are fractures, in addition, the healing is more complicated.
      There is a loss of protein rich fluids from open wounds, which needs to be replaced. Healing of
fractures may involve bed rest, which increases loss of calcium due to lack of movement.
      Nutritional Care: The losses in injury have to be replaced and needs of healing have to be met.
      In the first 24-48 hours after injury, the blood volume and electrolyte balance needs to be maintained.
      Next, the diet must help to resist infection, ensure healing, restore muscular strength and avoid
weight loss.
      Nutrients Needed: (a) Sufficient protein and calories to meet the above-mentioned needs
      (b) In case of fracture, additional calcium and vit. D need to be provided
      (c) Intakes of Vit. B complex be increased in proportion to increase in calories and protein
      (d) Vits. A and C to ensure wound healing and prevent infection
      Intake of drinks providing high protein and calories between meals ensure adequate nutrient
intake and utilization. The mode of feeding - oral, tube feeding or parenteral route – depends upon the
severity and location of the injury. (Refer to Chapter 24 for details of diets).

Surgery
      It is good to remember that to aid recovery from surgery, nutritional support is necessary.
      Some illnesses need surgery as a corrective measure, for example, appendicitis, removal of
infected part, etc. Prior to surgery, the patient may have lost appetite due to illness or may have had
restricted food intake. If there has been vomiting or diarrhea or loss of blood, these may result in losses
of sodium, potassium chloride, iron in addition to fluid loss.
      Prior to the operation, the patient is expected to fast. After operation, the patient may be given
only clear-liquid diet. Thus the nutritional leak is further aggravated.
Nutrition in Stress, Burns and Surgery                                                                    347


Nutritional Considerations
      The most critical factor is protein status of the patient. It is known that the stress of surgery will
increase protein losses for several days after surgery. So the patient is likely to be in negative nitrogen
balance.
Nutrients needed are:
      (a) Proteins for wound healing, to ensure resistance to infection and to protect liver from
            toxicity of anaesthesia.
      (b) Energy to maintain or restore desirable weight, spare proteins.
      (c) Ascorbic acid supplements to ensure wound healing.
      (d) Iron supplements or transfusions to cover blood loss.
      (e) Zinc supplements to promote wound healing and cell-mediated immunity.
      If nutritional status prior to surgery is improved, the surgical risk is reduced. If the patient is
underweight, weight gain may be beneficial. Likewise, weight loss may improve the status of obese
patients. However, rapid loss is not recommended as it may result in tissue breakdown.
      Hence post-operative nutritional care assumes great importance. A 30 to 50 per cent increase in
calorie and protein intake above maintenance level is needed to help gain weight if the patient is
underweight.
      Postoperative Diet: After a minor surgery, liquids may be tolerated within few hours and return
to normal diet is rapid. In other cases, when peristalsis resumes, patients are progressively given ice
chips, sips of water, a clear liquid, full liquid, soft and then normal diet. The diet is similar to that given
in Tables 24.3 and 24.4. The rate of progression is dependent on the patient’s condition and tolerance
of food. If the patient is unable to take food orally or is not able to eat sufficient food, it is necessary to
resort to tube feeding or parenteral feeding.
      If a patient is dehydrated,, it is important to ensure rehydration, before planning surgery.
      If the surgery is minor, a deficient intake for a few days may not pose a serious problem. But if
the person is nutritionally depleted and has to undergo a major surgery, the matter may be serious.
Therefore screening persons on admission to identify those at nutritional risk is very important.

Specific Surgery
      Though the basic dietary needs of all surgery patients are similar in each case, attention to some
specific aspects helps to ensure comfort of the patient.
      Teeth: the diet is restricted to liquids (cool), followed by soft foods for multiple tooth extractions
      Tonsillectomy: After the operation, cold bland food, low-fibre foods are given followed by soft
foods, not too hot or cold and then to regular normal diet.
      Gastrectomy: Removal of part or all of the stomach and vagotomy (cutting of the vagus nerve
to relieve pain). In gastric cancer and sometimes for intractable peptic ulcer, part or all of the
stomach(gastrectomy) and the vagus nerve (vagotomy) are removed surgically. Digestion of proteins
and fats, absorption of iron, vit. B12 is adversely affected. In absence of vagus nerve, food flow
through gastrointestinal tract is increased and diarrhea and steatorrhea are likely to occur. These
problems result in the patient losing weight.
      Hence diet modifications are a must to cope with these problems.
348                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Dietary Modifications: 60-90 ml clear liquids are given each hour, after gastrectomy for first
two days. A full-liquid or very low residue diet is allowed by third day. Vit. B12 is given by injection.
Since tolerance is low, foods are introduced one by one, meals are very small and frequent. The order
of introduction of foods is as follows:
      (1) Cereals, milk, cream soups, fruit, purees, eggs, custards.
      (2) Cottage cheese, pureed vegetables, tender chicken (in non-vegetarian diet)
      Foods included should be rich in proteins, moderate in fat and low in sugars. Fluids are given
between meals.
Dumping Syndrome
      This is one of the problems faced by some patients after gastrectomy. This is mainly due to
inappropriate composition of diet, with sugars being used as a CHO source. These patients suffer from
nausea, weakness, sweating and faintness soon after eating. They often suffer from diarrhea, vomiting
and lose weight. Due to absence of stomach, foods enter into the intestines directly. The water from
blood circulation is tied up by the large amount of carbohydrates present and blood volume is reduced.
This results in the symptoms given above.
      The diet for this condition is given in Table 34.1. Intake of bulking agents before meals helps to
slow intestinal motility.
                      Table 34-1 High Protein, Moderate Fat, Low CHO Diet

          Diet Pattern
          Include 100-120g complex CHO daily
          Avoid simple sugars, syrups, sweet desserts etc.
          Include liberal protein and moderate fat.
          Take 6 small meals regularly every day. Take liquids 30-60 minutes after meals. Avoid
          very hot or very cold food
          Eat slowly, chew food well and rest before and after meals
          Include vitamins and mineral supplements
          Plan the diet to suit individuals e.g. some patients cannot tolerate milk.
          Foods allowed each day
          Egg-1, soft or hard cooked, scrambled or poached.
          Low fat milk: 300 ml, if tolerated - take ½ - 1 hr after meals
          Dals : Mung, masur, cooked - 50 g.
          Fish, Poultry, Meat: all kinds, baked, boiled (not fried), stewed – 8 oz.
          Chapati – 1 chapati per meal or 1 slice enriched bread per meal
          Bread substitutes: rice, boiled or mashed potato or sweet potato, spaghetti, macaroni
          noodles
          Cereal: one serving
          Vegetables: all kinds one serving per meal
          Fruits: fresh, one serving per meal
          Fruit juices between meals
          Fats: butter, cream, oil
          Nuts: if tolerated
Nutrition in Stress, Burns and Surgery                                                                349

      In conclusion, surgery, burns, fevers and infections are traumas which lead to increased pace of
metabolism in the body. Thus there is a need for increased supply of nutrients in the diet. At the same
time, the injury causes a loss of nutrients from the body.
      Therefore, the diet must be modified to provide extra fluid, proteins, energy, vitamins and minerals
as required in these conditions. When surgery is preplanned or elective, the nutritional status must be
improved before surgery. When food cannot be taken orally, enteral or parenteral nutrition should be
used.

Study Questions
      1.   What is stress? How are nutritional needs affected by stress?
      2.   Discuss the various degrees of burns and the nutritional care of the patient with burns.
      3.   What is accidental injury and how are the nutritional needs of the patient met?
      4.   Discuss the nutritional needs of a patient who has undergone surgery.
      5.   What is a dumping syndrome?
                                                                                   CHAPTER 35


Nutrition: Addictive Behaviours in Anorexia
             Nervosa, Bulimia and Alcoholism


      Definition
      Eating Disorders
          Anorexia Nervosa: Causes, Symptoms,
          Treatment, Nutrition Therapy
          Bulimia Nervosa: Diet for Bulimics
      Alcoholism: Effects of Alcohol Intake, Diet, Complications
          Interactions of Alcohol and Nutrition, Nutrition Therapy



Definitions
       Addictive behaviours are compulsive ways of living (eating, drinking, etc.). Anorexia nervosa and
Bulimia are addictive behaviours related to food intake, while alcoholism is the result of addiction to
alcohol and alcoholic drinks. There are no simple causes or solutions to eating and drinking disorders.
Each case has to be studied and the patient helped to normalcy with patience and perseverance.
       Though eating disorders have been known since the Middle Ages, the incidence of eating disorders
is on the rise in the developed countries. One of the contributing factors is the breakdown of social
structure resulting in isolation of individuals. Luckily there is hardly any report of these in India, but one
needs to watch and prevent these, as the treatment and rehabilitation of persons suffering from eating
disorders is very slow and expensive.
       The incidence of alcoholism is on the increase in all strata of population in India. It needs to be
stemmed as it affects the well being of the whole family adversely
       All these disorders result in the deterioration of the nutritional status of the person; therefore
nutritional rehabilitation of the patient is a very important part of therapy.

Eating Disorders
      Anorexia nervosa implies loss of appetite. It can aptly be described as denying one’s appetite.
In USA one per cent girls in the age range of 12 to 18 years suffer from it. Its occurrence in males and
adults is not common. Girls whose profession demands maintaining ultra slim figures (such as models,
Nutrition: Addictive Behaviours in Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia and Alcoholism                              351

dancers, athletes) have long standing histories of eating disorders. Bulimia means “ox-hunger” or
being as hungry as an ox. The persons suffering from bulimia go on a eating binge often and feel guilty.
So they try to get rid of the food by forced vomiting, fasting, taking diuretics or using laxatives. They
keep their binge –purge behaviour a secret and hence it is difficult to identify the disorder until the
stress of these episodes results in some visible impact on the system. Even male athletes( runners,
wrestlers, swimmers, etc.) and pilots also resort to binge-purge practices.
      Causes: Addictive behaviours have multiple causes – emotional, psychological, social and
biological, which result in disordered eating. Stress may have a strong role and lack of appropriate
coping mechanism is another common factor.
      Symptoms of Anorexia Nervosa: The anorectic patient is often 20 to 40 per cent below desirable
weight for the age and stature and appears to be skin and bones. Other symptoms are lowered body
temperature, slower basal metabolism, decreased heart rate (hence easy fatigue, fainting, sleepiness),
iron-deficiency anemia, rough dry scaly and cold skin from a poor nutrient intake, low white blood cell
count (increasing risk of infection and death), loss of hair, constipation (and laxative abuse), loss of
menstrual periods and deterioration of teeth due to frequent vomiting, An anorectic person is
psychologically and physically ill and needs help.
      Treatment of Anorexia Nervosa: The patient is often a victim of isolation and fear. Hence the
health team must include a psychologist in addition to a physician, dietitian and other health personnel.
They should all work together to restore a sense of balance, purpose and future with the cooperation of
the patient. The first step is to help the patient to gain weight, as a psychiatrist cannot counsel a
starving person.
      Nutrition Therapy: The first step is to increase the person’s food intake. This will help to stop
weight loss and may help weight gain. The next is to restore regular food habits. The third is to ensure
that the patient keeps in weekly contact with the dietitian. In all this it is critical to allow the person to
feel in control of her life in the early stage of treatment. There should be no surprises, as these may be
detrimental to progress. Anorectics are very clever and resistant. They try to disguise weight loss or
fake weight gain by wearing many layers of clothes, putting coins in the pocket and drinking a lot of
water before weighing. One needs to gain their trust to be able to help them.
      The nutritional rehabilitation is slow. The nutritional care consists of going through the stages of
liquid to soft to full diet. (refer to Chapter 23)
      The mode of feeding will depend on the condition of the patient. It is important to educate the
patient and help her/his family. Some points to note in the treatment of anorectics are:
       1. Patients need to be given intravenous feedings to restore fluid and electrolyte balance, when
           the patient is in a critical state and is likely to get dehydrated.
       2. When patient’s nutritional state is precarious, give peripheral parenteral nutrition to support
           oral intake.
       3. Get patients to be partners in the efforts to restore satisfactory nutritional status; attain
           normal weight and develop normal eating patterns.
       4. Anorectics are intelligent patients. Educate them about their normal growth pattern and the
           intake to meet the needs for their growth. This will enable them to set goals to attain their
           normal growth gradually.
       5. Lastly avoid food being the centre point of their day. They need to take interest in recreational
           activities – music, games, reading, enjoying family company, making friends etc. to get back
           to enjoying normal life of which food is an important part.
352                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


Bulimia Nervosa
      An increasing number of youngsters, especially females (models, actresses, dancers, athletes and
others) go through stages of eating large amounts of foods (high fat sweets) and then get rid of it by
vomiting. This disorder is called bulimia nervosa. Bulemics may eat 3,000 to 5,000 calories in one
extended binge and then vomit to get rid of it. With repeated episodes, they may have chloride and
potassium deficiencies, which may lead to heart damage and other complications.
      Bulemics suffer from low self-esteem and depression. It is necessary to help a bulemic develop
self-esteem through understanding self worth, develop a positive attitude, learn to take pleasure in
simple activities (listening to music, reading, writing, drawing, sewing, knitting, gardening, playing
games, etc.) and avoid depressing inactivity. Most bulemics have irregular food habits and they may be
underweight and undernourished.
Diet for Bulemics
      Bulemics need to understand about effects of starvation on the body, their nutrient needs and how
to meet these through planned diet modification. Bulemics need to recognise that their primary aim is
the stabilization of their body weight without having to go through binging and purging, which disturbs
and hurts the body’s well being. Some points to note in their treatment are:
       1. Help patients to understand and plan a diet which meets their normal nutritional needs. The
            actual calorie expenditure needs are determined by measuring oxygen consumption.
       2. Plan the diet using basic food guide. (Chapter 23, Table 23.1). The foods thus selected meet
            the mineral and vitamins needs (refer to Table 23.1). Hence supplements are not necessary.
       3. The patient can be helped to select a varied diet, after taking her likes and dislikes into
            account.
       4. Teach how to measure or weigh foods to give confidence that there will be no over- eating.
       5. Personalized meal plans (3 meals + snacks) with wide variety of foods helps acceptance.
       6. Avoid excessive bulk in the initial stages to have a third of stomach empty.
       7. Gradually increase intake by 200 calories until the norm is reached.
       8. Avoid fasting, skipping meals and eating inadequate amounts at a meal as it leads to binges.
            Keep food record.
      These measures help to develop confidence in themselves and make them self-reliant in managing
their diet.

Alcoholism
      People offer beverages to companions in social gatherings. Some people choose alcohol over
other beverages such as juice, coffee, tea, soft drinks or milk. For some of these people, alcohol use
becomes a life-shattering addiction, alcoholism, which leads to severe malnutrition, physical illness and
erosion or loss of self-esteem.
      Persistent intake of amounts of alcohol that exceed the daily permitted levels indicates a dependence
that needs to be recognized as addiction and dealt with.
      Alcoholism is a major chronic disease. It is also a major social problem which afflicts a large
section of society, irrespective of economic status. It accounts for more than half of fatal car accidents.
As the drinker gets abusive, violent and/or incapable, the effects of alcoholism on the family are
Nutrition: Addictive Behaviours in Anorexia Nervosa, Bulimia and Alcoholism                              353

devastating. The help of an outside agency such as Alcoholics Anonymous is needed to help
rehabilitation. However, for such help to have any success, the addict needs to admit that she/he has a
problem and really wants to give up drinking. Until she/he reaches that point and starts to co-operate in
rehabilitation, the life of the family can be of unbearable misery.
Effect of Alcohol Intake
      Alcoholic beverages contain ethanol, which liberates 7.1 kcal/g.. If it replaces half the intake of
food in a balanced diet, it results in malnutrition and malfunction. Chronic alcohol consumption may
alter digestion and absorption of food. Ethanol disrupts the gastric mucosal barrier and causes acute
gastritis. Massive bleeding and hence iron deficiency may accompany acute gastritis. Alcohol may
increase acid secretion. Intake of excessive alcohol (1g/ kg) results in lesions in the duodenum and
functional changes in the small intestines. This may give rise to diarrhea, malabsorption of folate,
thiamine, B12, fat and xylose, changes in pancreatic secretion and bile salt metabolism.
      The most significant complication in alcoholics is liver disease (fatty liver. hepatitis and cirrhosis)
which aggravates the malnourished state. The second organ affected is heart leading to heart disease.
Beriberi may result due to thiamine deficiency. Deficiencies of pyridoxine and folate may result in
abnormalities in blood synthesis. The nervous disorders result in decreased fine movements. Besides
thiamine, deficiency of other B vitamins may also lead to these disorders.
      The success of nutritional therapy depends on two points. The first is removal of the cause –
abstinence from alcohol. The second is nutritional care of the patient to reverse the organ damage to
ensure healing and regain normal function.
      Alcoholic fatty liver is the earliest stage of liver injury. This is a completely reversible stage.
Abstinence from alcohol and specific therapy for nutritional deficiencies helps recovery.
      Diet, which provides normal protein low fat and extra vitamins, remains the mainstay of the
treatment. Several times the daily requirements of water soluble vitamins are given. Sufficient calorie
intake is necessary to prevent the breakdown of proteins in the body. One indicator of calorie sufficiency
is weight gain, if the patient is underweight, and weight maintenance, if the patient has not lost weight
due to excess alcohol intake,
      Complications: When the patient has neuropsychiatric symptoms, she/he may need hospitalisation
to ensure abstinence and special nutritional care.
      In case of ascites and edema, dietary intake and salt restriction will need to be monitored according
to the severity of the condition. In extreme cases, sodium may be restricted to 250 mg per day. As the
severity decreases, sodium intake may be increased to 500 mg or more per day.
      Neurologic disorders in the alcoholic include peripheral neuropathy, in which thiamine B12 ,
pyridoxine, nicotinic acid, pantothenic acid and riboflavin deficiencies are associated. It is treated with
abstinence and B-vitamin therapy. Though optimal dosage is not established, one recommendation is 10
times the normal requirement for 1 week and 5 times the daily needs after that.
      Iron deficiency in the alcoholic needs to be treated cautiously. In patients with liver disease,
excess iron may lead to liver damage. The patient may respond simply to abstinence and vitamin
supplementation.
      In case of beri-beri heart disease, thiamine repletion of 5 to 10 mg per day is likely to be sufficient,
along with adequate diet and alcohol abstinence.
      The interactions of alcohol and nutrition are presented in Table 35.1. Thus multiple nutrient
deficiencies result from reduced food intake and interference with nutrient use in the body.
354                                                        Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

                          Table 35.1 Effects of Alcohol Intake on Nutrition

       1. Alcohol is empty calories, it displaces food, hence nutrients.
       2. Alcohol reduces food intake resulting in inadequate nutrient intake.
       3. Alcohol disrupts every tissue’s metabolism of nutrients.
            (i) Stomach cells over-secrete both acid and histamine (which causes inflammation);
                extra acid may cause ulcers in stomach and esophagus linings.
           (ii) Intestinal cells fail to absorb thiamin, folate, Vit. B6 and other vitamins.
          (iii) Liver cells lose efficiency in activating Vit. D and change their synthesis and elimination
                of bile.
          (iv) Retinal cells process alcohol instead of Vit. A alcohol (retinoal) thus damaging vision
           (v) Kidneys excrete essential ,minerals (magnesium, calcium, potassium and zinc) thus
                creating deficiency of these minerals.
       4. Alcohol metabolites interfere with Vit. B6 metabolism and thus reduce RB cells production.
       5. Excessive alcohol expels folate from of all its sites of action and storage. Thus liver storage
          of folate is leaked to blood to kidneys. Blood is excreted from the kidneys. Intestines fail to
          retrieve folate leading to folate deficiency. This inhibits synthesis of new intestinal and
          blood cells.


      Nutrition Therapy: Patients treated for alcohol addiction need simultaneous optimal nutrition
therapy to reverse nutritional deficiencies that occur. These include night blindness (Vit. A)), beriberi,
(thiamine), pellagra (niacin), scurvy (Vit. C) and protein-energy-malnutrition. Therefore there is a need
for adequate intake to ensure recovery of the patient.

Study Questions
      1.   What are addictive behaviours?
      2.   Discuss the symptoms and the points to note in the treatment of an anoretic.
      3.   What are the important points to note while treating bulimics?
      4.   List the effects of alcohol on the human system.
                                                                              CHAPTER 36


                      Nutrient Drug Interaction


     Introduction
     High-risk Segments of Population
     Nutrient Absorption
     Drug Absorption
     Effect of Drug on Food Intake
     Nutrient Metabolism
     Alcohol
     Caffeine
     MAOI Inhibitors
     Precautions to be Taken



Introduction
      Diet and drugs are both necessary to treat and cure diseases. But some drugs may have adverse
effect on the utilisation of some nutrients. So it is necessary to understand their relationship and
maximise their utility by judicious planning.
      Interaction between diet and drugs is significant in
      (a) Those who need long term drug therapy.
      (b) Those who are malnourished.
      (c) Those suffering from chronic diseases.
      (d) Those who have undergone surgery.
      (e) Those who are obese
      (f) High-risk segments of population
      Interactions of frequently used drugs with nutrients are given in Table 36.1.

High Risk Segments of Population
       These include developing fetus, infants (especially premature ones), pregnant women, chronically
ill persons and elderly persons.
356                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      In late pregnancy increased concentrations of the transport protein for most drugs results in drug
concentration in the fetus.
      Young children (including infants) have high requirements of nutrients per kg body weight; hence
drugs that decrease absorption or increase excretion of a nutrient affects them adversely.
      Many elderly persons suffer from chronic diseases and have to take several drugs for prolonged
periods. Their food intake is often inadequate. They may take wrong drugs at times. Thus this segment
of elderly need special assistance to avoid adverse nutrient drug interaction.
      Some commonly used drugs include analgesics (pain killers), cough, cold, sinus and allergy
drugs, digestive aids, antacids, sleep aids (sedatives), appetite suppressants, diuretics, antibiotics etc.
Many of these drugs are available without prescription. In addition, health enthusiasts take vitamin and
mineral pills in the belief, if a little is good, a higher amount may be better for health. These create a
scenario for an undesirable nutrient-drug interaction.

Nutrient Absorption
      Most nutrients and drugs are absorbed in the small intestine. Hence it is the major site for nutrient-
drug intervention.
      The absorption of nutrients may be adversely affected by drugs, if the transit time is altered.
Laxatives tend to reduce nutrient absorption by reducing the transit time. If the pH of stomach contents
is increased due to drugs (e.g. antacids), the absorption of iron, calcium, zinc and folates is reduced.
      Fat and fat-soluble vitamins are poorly absorbed, when drugs are taken to reduce cholesterol by
the patient; neomycin (an antibiotic) has the same effect.
      High doses of antacids (aluminium or magnesium hydroxide) can cause phosphate depletion,
leading to muscle weakness, loss of appetite (anorexia) and even congestive heart failure. Diuretics
(thiazide and furosemide) can cause sodium, potassium and magnesium depletion leading to loss of
appetite and muscle weakness.

Drug Absorption
      A drug is a chemical, which interacts with the metabolic process in the body to bring about a
desirable effect. Drug action can occur only after it is dissolved, carried to the target site and absorbed.
About 75 per cent of oral drugs will generally be absorbed in 1 to 3 hours.
      The metabolism of many drugs and a variety of foreign compounds is carried out by the mixed-
function-oxidase system (MFOS). Almost all nutrients are components of the MFO system. These
include proteins, lipids, B-complex vitamins (nicotinic acid, riboflavin and pantothenic acid), fat soluble
vitamins (A and E) and minerals (iron, copper, calcium, zinc and magnesium).
      When food enters the stomach, the gastric pH is lowered by dilution and stomach emptying is
delayed. These factors may reduce the absorption rate and hence the effectiveness of the drugs. In
view of this, it is advisable to take pain relievers (analgesics), fever reducing drugs (antipyretics),
antiinfectives for acute infections and antihistamines on an empty stomach for rapid recovery. Aspirin
and antibiotics are also better absorbed in a fasting state.
      Almost a billion dollars is spent each year in the United States of America on antacids, making
these products among the most popular over-the-counter (OTC) drugs. These tablets and liquids are
gulped down for the relief of heartburn, sour stomach and indigestion. Antacids may also be prescribed
to treat stomach ulcers.
Nutritent Drug Interaction                                                                             357

      Although many consumers take antacids almost casually, these drugs are not as harmless as they
may seem. Antacids can affect the way other drugs behave in the body. They can speed the absorption
of some prescription drugs, possibly causing an overdose, or slow it for others thus reducing their
effectiveness.
      Some nutrients and food components can decrease food absorption and hence its effectiveness.
These include amino acids from high protein diet, dairy products and iron from iron supplements.
      Therefore, it is advisable to time intake of food and drugs at appropriate intervals, since one needs
both for proper recovery.

Effect of Drugs on Food Intake
      Food intake is affected by drugs taken by the patient. The effects can include decrease or increase
in appetite and taste, nausea and vomiting. For example, antacids, caffeine, cough medicines,
antihistamines can decrease appetite.
      Drugs taken to reduce weight are intended to reduce appetite. But their effectiveness is reduced
rapidly. Hence their utility in weight reduction regimen is limited.
      Antibiotics and many chemotherapy agents (for cancer) may cause diarrhea or vomiting and thus
reduce food intake.
      Some drugs may be a source of nutrients which may not be appropriate for some patients. For
example, cough medications may contain sugar; antibiotics and antacids may contain sodium.

Nutrient Metabolism
      Some drugs used as anticonvulsants may cause calcium loss and folate deficiency. Calcium loss
may lead to osteomalacia on prolonged use of anticonvulsants. Hence the need for nutrient supplements
with these drugs. In contrast, the effectiveness of some drugs such as levadopa and coumarin is
reduced due to vitamin supplements (pyridoxine and vitamin K) respectively.
      Some drugs block enzymatic action involved in DNA synthesis and thus lead to the death of a
cell. This is the principle used in the chemotherapy of cancer.
      Two common antivitamins, used as drugs, are the folate antagonists, methotrexate (MRX) (used
in the treatment of leukemia and rheumatoid arthritis) and pyrimethamine (used in the treatment of
malaria and ocular toxoplasmosis). These drugs displace folic acid from the related enzyme and the
unbound folic acid is excreted. In the absence of folic acid, DNA synthesis is inhibited, cell synthesis
stops and the cell dies. Isoniazid, which is used in the long-term treatment of TB, forms a complex
with the B-vitamin, pyridoxine, which may lead to its deficiency in some patients. Anticoagulants used
in treatment are intentional vitamin K antagonists. The acidity of the gastrointestinal tract also affects
drug disposition. A more acidic environment reduces the availability of penicillin and isoniazid but
increases the absorption of tetracyclines. Food decreases, delays or enhances the absorption of some
antibiotics.

Alcohol
      Alcohol is not prescribed as a drug. But it is a chemical, which affects nutrition in many ways. It
yields 7 calories/gramme, but not much of other nutrient. It is a habit-forming drink; hence its use is
best avoided.
358                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Alcohol can cause nausea and thus decrease appetite. Alcohol abuse commonly results in
deficiencies of thiamin, folate, vitamin B6, vit. A and zinc.

Caffeine
      Caffeine, an addictive chemical, is present in tea, coffee, soft drinks and chocolates, which are
consumed by all age groups. It is reported that an average healthy person can take moderate amounts
of caffeine without any harmful effects.
      An intake of 1000mg/day or more of caffeine can cause diarrhea, headache, heartburn and
sleeplessness.
      Even in smaller amounts, caffeine can act as a diuretic. It can also increase a basal metabolic rate
and heart rate.
      More than 1000 over-the-counter drugs, which need no prescription, contain caffeine. These
drugs include those used to increase alertness and avoid sleepiness, headache and cold remedies and
even weight-control drugs.
      It is important to note that caffeine does not reverse the effects of alcohol, as it is commonly
believed and hence does not help in ‘sobering up’ after excessive intake of alcohol.

MAOI Inhibitors
       The most harmful drug-nutrient interaction is the one between the enzyme Monoamine Oxidase
Inhibitors and blood-pressure elevating (pressor) amines, especially tyramine.
       MAOI (Monamine Oxidase inhibitors) are used as drugs. These include antidepressants,
antimicrobials, antineoplastics and antihypertesnsive drugs.
       Normally, the enzyme MAO (Monoamine Oxidase) inactivates the pressor agents and thus prevents
the release of excess of norepinephrine, a hormone. The MAOIs block this reaction and the levels of
norepinephrine rise unchecked. This can lead to reactions such as headaches, hypertension, palpitations
etc. Major strokes have been reported in extreme cases. The severity of reaction is affected by the
dosage of the drug and the level of dietary tyramine.
       The tyramine content of foods is increased by aging ( as in fermentation or spoilage). Hence it is
best to take fresh foods in diet, when a person is on MAOI therapy. It is also advisable to avoid foods
stored for long periods and those likely to have bacterial contamination. Alteration to restrict tyramine
in the diet must be made some days before starting MAOI therapy and be continued for 3 – 4 weeks
after the therapy.

Precautions to be taken
     The unrestricted buying and ingestion of drugs bought over the counter is a cause of concern in
developing countries like India where there is little supervision of the sale of drugs, especially for those
needing a medical doctor’s prescription. Nutrient absorption can be reduced in such situations and in
extreme cases may lead to incompatability reactions endangering life. This is more so with elderly
persons as they are prone to taking drugs for various ailments.
     In conclusion to quote Sizer and Whitney (1997)(1) “ When you need to take a medicine, do so
wisely. Ask your physician, pharmacist or health care provider for specific instructions about the
1. Sizer and Whitney, Nutrition Concepts and Controversies p-511, 7th ed., West/Wadsworth, an International
Thomson Publishing Co. 1997.
Nutritent Drug Interaction                                                                          359

doses, times and how to take them – for example, with meals or an empty stomach. If you notice new
symptoms or if a drug does not seem to be working well, consult your physician.

                Table 36.1 Interactions of Frequently Used Drugs with Nutrients1

      Drug                      Possible Effects                   Time of Intake


      Antipyretic               Nausea and vomiting                Take on empty stomach
      Aspirin                   Gastric pain or bleeding           for quick relief; with food
                                                                   to reduce gastric disturbance.
      Acetaminophen             G.I. irritation
      Antibiotic
      Amoxicillin               Diarrhea, nausea, vomiting
      Ampicillin or             -do-                               Take on empty stomach
      Penicillin                Glossitis, stomatitis
      Erythromycin              Stomach ache, diaarhea,            Take on empty stomach
                                nausea and vomiting
      Tetracycline              Loss of hunger, diarrhea,          Take with water on empty
                                glossitis, nausea, vomiting.       stomach
                                Difficulty in swallowing           Do not take dairy foods
                                                                   or iron containing foods
                                                                   within 3 hours
      Bronchodilator
      Theophylline              Loss of hunger, stomach upset      Take with food
                                nausea and vomiting
      Antihypertensive
      Atenolol                  diarrhea, nausea.
      Propranolol               stomach ache, constipation,        Take with food
                                diarrhea, nausea and vomiting;
                                decreased CHO tolerance
      Cardiotonic
      Digoxin                   Loss of hunger, diarrhea,          Take on empty stomach,
                                nausea and vomiting; increased     avoid increased sodium,
                                urinary losses of minerals         avoid bran, take adequate K.
      Diuretics
      Chlorthalidone            Loss of hunger, constipation,      Take with food, reduce Na
                                diarrhea, stomach pain,            intake, take adequate protein.
                                Decreased CHO tolerance,
                                electrolyte imbalance
      Antiinflammatory
      Ibuprofen                 Abdominal upset and pain,          Take with food; avoid alcohol
      Naproxen                  edema flatulence, G.I.bleeding,
                                heartburn, nausea and vomiting

1. Adapted from Lecos, C.W. FDA Consumer, 21: 22-27, 1987- 1988.
360                                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


      Drug                        Possible Effects                      Time of Intake
      Antipyretic

      Steroidal
      Antinflammatory
      Prednisone                Indigestion, fluid and electrolyte      Take with food, reduce Na
                                imbalance, fluid and Na retention,      intake, increase K, protein
                                -ve N balance, peptic ulcer             vit. D intake, reduce CHO
                                                                        intake, avoid alcohol

      The only instruction people need about illicit drugs is to avoid them altogether for countless
reasons. As for smoking and chewing tobacco, the same advice applies: don’t take these habits up, or
if you already have, take steps to quit. For drugs with lesser consequences to health, such as caffeine,
use moderation.
      Try to live life in a way that requites less chemical assistance. If sleepy, try a 15-minute nap or
meditation instead of a 15-minute coffee break. The coffee will stimulate your nerves for an hour, but
the alternatives will refresh your attitude for the rest of the day.
      If you suffer from constipation, try getting enough exercise, fiber and water for a few days.
Chances are that a laxative will be unnecessary.
      The strategy being suggested here is to take control of your body, allowing your reliable, self-
healing nature to make fine adjustments that you need not force with chemicals. Bodies have few
requests, adequate nutrition, rest, exercise and hygiene. Give yours what it asks for, and let it function
naturally, day-to-day, without interference from drugs.”
                    Table 36.2 Caffeine Content of Some Foods and Beverages

            Beverage/Food                        Amount (oz.)                  Caffeine (mg)

              Coffee
                Brewed                                  5                         40 – 180
                Instant                                 5                         30 – 120
              Tea
                Brewed                                  5                         20 – 110
                Iced                                    6                         34 – 38
              Soft Drinks
                Coca-cola (regular and diet)            6                            22
                Pepsi-cola                              6                            19
              Other
                Cocoa beverage                          5                          2 – 20
                Chocolate milk                          4                          1–4
                Milk chocolate                          1                          1 – 15
Nutritent Drug Interaction                                                                           361


Study Questions
       1.   When is interaction between diet and drugs significant?
       2.   List the high-risk segments of population with reference to nutrient-drug interaction.
       3.   How do drugs affect nutrient absorption?
       4.   List the ill-effects of drugs on nutrient metabolism.
       5.   Discuss the action of MAOI inhibitors in the body.
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                        Appendices


Appendix A   —   Weights and Measures ............................................................... 365

Appendix B   —   Food Exchange Lists ................................................................. 366
Appendix C   —   Indian Names of Foodstuffs ........................................................ 371

Appendix D   —   Stability of Nutrients ................................................................... 373

Appendix E   —   Recommended Dietary Allowences for Indians 1989 ..................... 374
Appendix F   —   Food Composition ...................................................................... 375

Appendix G   —   Weight for Height for Age-Girls .................................................... 382
Appendix H   —   Weight for Height for Age-Boys ................................................... 383

Appendix I   —   Glossary ................................................................................... 384
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                            Appendix A


Weights and Measures

Equivalents
     20 drops           –   1 milliliter
     1 teaspoon         –   5 milliliters
     1 tablespoon       –   3 teaspoons or 15 milliliters
     1 cup              –   16 tablespoons or 237 milliliters
     1 Ladle            –   40 milliliter
     1 tea cup          –   145-150 milliliter
     1 katori (large)   –   175 milliliters

Abbreviations
     tsp                –   teaspoon
     T. or tbsp         –   tablespoon
     c                  –   cup
     g                  –   gramme/gram
     ml                 –   milliliter
                                       Appendix B


Food Exchange Lists
     Two lists are included
      1. Food Exchange List from the Diet Manual of AIIMS, New Delhi-110016.
      2. Food Exchange System suggested by SNDT University, Mumbai.

1. What is an Exchange List? (AIIMS)
      It is a group of foods of the same caloric value and similar protein, fat and carbohydrate content
that can be substituted for one another in a meal plan. Foods have been divided into six groups of
exchanges. Any one of the exchange groups cannot by itself supply all the needed nutrients for a well-
balanced diet. It requires all six of them put together as a team to supply the normal nutritional needs for
good health. The six major exchanges are:
       1. Milk exchange
       2. Vegetable exchange
       3. Fruit exchange
       4. Cereals and pulses exchange
       5. Meat exchange
       6. Fat exchange


                                           Milk Exchange
1.     Glass (250) milk exchange or substitute contains –
       Food                     Quantity
       Toned Milk               1 glass 250 ml                         CHO 10–12 gm
       Skimmed Milk             1–1/2 glass                            Protein 8 gm
       Butter Milk              4 glasses                              Fat 8 gm
       Curds                    250 gm (1 cup)                         Calories 140–150
       Fresh Paneer             50 gm
       Icecream                 100 gm (1 small cup)
Appendices                                                                          367


                               Vegetable Exchange
     Food Root Vegetables   Quantity                        Group A
     Arbi                   40 gm                           CHO 3 gm
     Potato                 40 gm                           Proteins 2 gm
     Zimikand               40 gm                           Calories 20 gm
     Kachalu                40 gm
     Sweet potato           40 gm
     Tapioca                25 gm

     Leafy Vegetables                                       Group B
     Spinach                100 gm                          CHO 6 gm
     Bathua                 100 gm                          Proteins 2 gm
     Cabbage                100 gm                          Calories 32 gm
     Sarson                 100 gm
     Methi                  100 gm

     Seasonal Vegetables                                    Group C
     Lauki                  100 gm                          CHO 6–8 gm
     Tinda                  100 gm                          Protein 2 gm
     Brinjal                100 gm                          Fats nil
     Cauliflower            100 gm                          Calories 32–40 gm
     Knolkohl               100 gm


                                  Fruit Exchange
     Foods                  Approx. measures
     Apple                  100 gm        1 medium               CHO 10 gm
     Orange                 100 gm        1 medium               Protein 1 gm
     Banana                 100 gm        1 small or big         Fats nil
     Guava                  100 gm        1 small                Calories 40 Kcal
     Mausambi               100 gm        1 small
     Mangoes                100 gm        1 small dusheri or 1 big slice.
     Big grapes             100 gm        20 no.
     Cherries               100 gm        20 no.
     Musk melon             250 gm        1/4 of medium size
     Papaya                 100 gm        1 slice
     Peaches                100 gm        2 medium
     Pears                  150 gm        4 small
     Plums                  100 gm        4 small
     Water melon            200 gm        1 cup
368                                               Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


                                     Cereal Exchange
      Foods                     Approx. measures
      Bread                     1-1/2 slice (1 lb bread)        CHO 17-18 gm
      Bajra                     small chapati                   protein 2 gm
      Barley                    1/2 cup cooked                  Fats Nil
      Maize                     1 small roti                    Calories 80–85
      Cornflakes                1/2 cup cooked
      Oat meal                  1/2 cup cooked
      Rice                      1/2 cup cooked
      Wheat flour               1-1/2 medium chapati
      Rice (puffed)             1 cup
      Sanvai                    1/2 cup cooked
      Dalia (wheat)             1/2 cup cooked
      Macroni                   1/2 cup cooked
      Biscuits                  5–10 salt and 3–5 sweet
      Soyabean flour            2 table-spoon


                                  Legumes and Pulses
      Foods                     Approx. measures
      Bengal gram               1/2 cup cooked                  CHO 15 gm
      Bengal gram (roasted)     1/2 cup cooked                  Proteins 5 gm
      Besan                     2 table spoon                   Calories 80 Kcal
      Black/Green/White gram/   1/2 cup cooked                  Fats : nil
      Rajmah/Lobia/Soyabean


                                      Meat Exchange
      Foods                     Approx. measures
      Mutton                    4 pieces or ribs                CHO 1–2 gm
      Chicken                   1 leg or breast                 Fats 2–4 gm
      Fish                      2 pieces                        Proteins 5 gm
      Egg Hen                   2 medium                        Calories 65 Kcal
      Paneer                    40 gm
      Ham                       25 gm ( 1 slice)
Appendices                                                                                   369


                                  Fat Exchange
     Foods                Approx. measures
     Butter               15 gm                               CHO nil
     Ghee                 11 gm                               Fats 11 gm
     Oil                  11 gm                               Proteins nil
     Vanaspati            11 gm                               Calories 100
     Almonds              15 gm
     Cashew nuts          30 gm
     Peanuts              20 gm


2. Food Exchange System Suggested by S.N.D.T. University, Mumbai
     Cereals:             Each exchange provides 100 kcal
                          6–12 exchange can be taken
                          1 katori cooked rice
                          1 big or 1-1/2 small bread slice
                          1 katori rawa upama
                          1 chapati or 2 phulkas
                          4-5 puris
                          1 katori rice flakes

     Pulses and Legume:   Each exchange gives 100 kcal
                          2–3 exchanges can be taken
                          1 katori dal (cooked)
                          1 katori legume/usal
                          1 katori varan

     Nuts and Oilseeds:   Each exchange gives 100 kcal
                          1 handful of groundnuts/cashewnuts/til/almonds/pista
                          1/4 katori fresh coconut grated

     Vegetables:          Each exchange supplies 25–30 kcal
                          2 exchanges or more can be taken
     Vegetable A          1 katori vegetable (preferably dark green
                          leafy vegetables)
     Vegetable B          1 katori any other vegetable, e.g., ladies finger, brinjal, etc.
     Vegetable C          1/2 katori root vegetable, e.g., carrot, beetroot
370                                              Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      Fruits:                  Each exchange supplies 50 kcal
                               1-2 exchange can be taken
                               1 fresh medium fruit (guava, apple, orange)
                               1/2 banana/small mango/1 sapota
                               1/2 glass fruit juice (unsweetened)

      Milk & Milk Products: Each exchange supplies 100 kcal
                            2 or more exchanges can be taken
                            1 glass of full milk or standard milk (unsweetened)
                            2 katoris of curds
                            1 cube of cheese/paneer

      Meat:                    Each exchange gives 100 kcal
                               One exchange can be taken
                               1 serving of poultry or fish
                               1 serving of meat/beef muscle
                               1 serving of mutton/egg
                               Vegetarians may substitute meat by extra
                               exchange of legumes/pulses/milk

      Fat:                     Each exchange gives 100 kcal
                               2–3 exchanges can be taken
                               2 tsp ghee/vanaspati oil
                               3 tsp butter

      Sugar:                   Each exchange gives 100 kcal
                               one exchange can be taken
                               5 tsp of sugar/jaggery
                               2 tsp of honey
                                  Appendix C


Indian Names of Foodstuffs
 S.No.     Name of Food       Hindi            Marathi       Gujarati        Tamil
  1             2               3                4              5              6
 15      Rice, parboiled    Usna Chawal     Ukdala tandool   Ukadello    Puzhungal arisi
                                                             chokha
 19      Rice, flakes       Chewra          Pohe             Pawa        Aval
 20      Rice, puffed       Murmura         Churmura         Murmura     Pori
 25      Vermicelli         Siwain          Shevaya          Semiya      Semiya
 32      Dal, bengalgram    Chane-ki-dal    Harbhara dal     Chana dal   Kadalai paruppu
 34      Dal, black gram    Urad dal        Udid dal         Adad dal    Ulutham paruppu
 46      Dal, red gram      Arhar dal       Tur dal          Tuver dal   Tuvaram paruppu
 35      Cowpeas            Lobia           Chavli                       Karamani
 43      Peas               Mattar          Vatana           Vatana      Pattani
 45      Rajmah (French     Rajmah          Shravan ghevda   Phansi
         beans dry)
 42      Moth beans         Moth            Matki                        Narippayir
 282     Groundnut          Moongi phali    Bhui mug         Bhoising    Nilakkadalai
 280     Garden cress       Halim           Ahliva           Saalio      Alivirai
         seeds
 648     Poppy seeds        Post dana       Khaskhas                     Khasakhasa
 51      Amaranth           Chaulai Sag     Math                         Thandu keerai
 71      Colocasia leaves   Arvi-ka-sag     Alu-pan                      Seppan ilaigal
 74      Coriander leaves   Hara dhania     Kothimbir        Kothmer     Kothamalli
 77      Drumstick leaves   Saijan patta    Shevaga pan      Saragavo    Murungai keerai
 229     Giant chillies     Sagiya Mirchi   Bhopali mirchi               Koda milagai
 218     Cluster beans      Guar-ki-phali   Govar            Govar       Kothavara
 346     Grape fruit        Chakotra                         Chakotra
 400     Pummelo            Chakotra        Papnas           Papnus      Bombilimus
 332     Cape goose berry   Rasbari         Tipari           Popta
 351     Jack fruit         Kathal          Phanas           Phanas
                                                                                     (Contd...)
372                                    Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy


  1            2              3            4              5                6
 775   Watermelon         Tarbul      Kalingad        Tarbuj         Darbusini
                                                                     Mathalam
 398   Pomegranate        Anar        Dalimb          Dalamb         Pazham
 402   Raisins            Khishmise   Manuka          Khishmish      Drakshai
 301   Corainder seeds    Dhania      Dhane           Dhania         Kothamalli vidai
 302   Cumin seeds        Jira        Jire            Jiru           Jeerakam
 592   Arrow root flour   Tavkeel     Toukil                         Kuva mavu
                                       Appendix D



Stability of Nutrients

                      Neutral   Acid     Alkaline     Air or                               Cooking
     Nutrients          pH       pH         pH         O2          Light       Heat         Losses
                                                                                          (per cent)

  Vit. C                U        S           U          U            U           U          0–100
  Thiamin               U        S           U          U            S           U          0–80
  Riboflavin            S        S           U          S            U           U          0–75
  Vit. A                S        U           S                       U           U          0–40
  Carotene              S        U           S          U            U           U          0–30
  (Provit. A)
  Vit. D                S                    U          U            U           U          0–40
  Mineral salts         S        S           S          S            S           S          0–03
  Lysine                S        S           S          S            S           U          0–40
  Threonine             S        U           U          S            S           U          0–20
  Tryptophan            S        U           S          S            U           S          0–15
  A ll other EA A 1     S        S           S          S            S           S          0–10

S—Stable; U—Unstable
1. EAA—Essential Amino Acid, Isoleucine, Leucine, Methionine, Phenylalanine and Valine.
                                                                                                                                                            374
Appendix E – Recommended Dietary Allowanes for Indians—1989

 Group Particulars         Body   Net       Protein   Fat   Calcium Iron       Vit.A   µg/ d  Thiamin Ribo- Nicotinic Pyri- Ascor- Folic Vit B12
                           Wt/kg energy       g/d     g/d    mg/d   mg/d                        mg/d  flavin  acid    doxin bic acid acid µg/ d
                                  kcal                                       Retinol B-carotene       mg/d   mg/d     mg/d mg/d µg/ d
 Man     Sedentary Work            2350                                                         1.2       1.4      16
         Moderate Work       60    2700       60      15      400      28      600     2400      1.4      1.6      18      2.4      40     100     1
         Heavy Work                3200                                                          1.6      1.9      21
 Woman Sedentary Work              1800                                                         0.9       1.1      12
         Moderate Work             2100       50      15      400      30      600     2400      1.1      1.3      14      2.0      40     100     1
         Heavy Work                2450                                                          1.2      1.5      16
         Pregnant Woman      50    +300      +15      25      1000     38      600     2400     +0.2     +0.2      +2      2.5      40     400     1
         Lactation
         0–6 months                 +550      +25     35      1000     30      950     3800    +0.3     +0.3      +4       2.5      80     150    1.5
         6–12 months                +400      +18                                              +0.2     +0.2      +3
 Infants 0–6 months         5.4    118/kg   2.05/kg           500                               59       71       780      0.3      25     25     0.2




                                                                                                                                                            Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy
                                                                                               µg/kg    µg/kg    µg/kg
          6–12 months       8.6    108/kg   1.65/kg                            300     1200     54       65       71       0.4
                                                                                               µg/kg    µg/kg    µg/kg
 Children 1–3 years         12.1   1125       23                       12      400     1600     0.6      0.7      7.0     plant
          4–6 years         18.2   1600       31      20      400      18      400     1600     0.8      1.0       11      0.9
          7–9 years         25.2   1925       41      15               25      600     2400     1.0      1.2      13       1.6
 Boys     10–12 years       33.5   2150       53      15      600      28      600              1.1      1.3      14
 Girls    10–12 years       35.0   1950       55      15               20              2400     1.0      1.2      13                40     100 0.2–1.0
 Boys     13–15 years       46.8   2400       71      15      600      43      600              1.2      1.4      16
 Girls    13–15 years       47.8   2050       67      15               28              2400     1.0      1.2      14       2.0
 Boys     16–18 years       56.1   2600       79      15      500      50      600              1.3      1.6      17
 Girls    16–18 years       49.7   2050       65      15               30              2400     1.0      1.2      14

In mixed cereal diet with absorption of 3% in man, 5% in woman, 8% in pregnant.
Narasingha Rao B.S., Y.G. Deosthale and K.C. Pant, Nutrient Composition of Indian Foods, p. 94, National Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad-500007, India,
1989.
                                                                                                                                              Appendices
Appendix F – Table of Food Composition1 (Nutrients per 100 g edible portion)

 S.No.2Food                Moisture   Energy   CHO Protein   Fat   Minerals   Fibre   Calcium   Iron Thiamin Riboflavin Niacin Vit.C Vit.A

                                       Cal.     g      g      g       g        g        mg      mg     mg        mg        mg    mg mcg

 1     2                      3         4       5      6      7       8        9        10      11      12        13       14     15    16

       Cereals and Their Products
       Rice
 17    Raw, milled           13.7      345     78.2   6.8    0.5     0.6      0.2       10       3.1   0.06      0.06      1.9    0     0
 15    Parboiled, milled     13.3      346     79.0   6.4    0.4     0.7      0.2        9       4.0   0.21      0.05      3.8    0     0
 19    Flakes                12.2      346     77.3   6.6    1.2     2.0      0.7       20      20.0   0.21      0.05      4.0    0     0
 20    Puffed                14.5      325     73.6   7.5    0.1     3.8      0.3       20       6.6   0.21      0.01      4.1    0     0
       Wheat
 27    Whole                           346            11.8   105                        41      4.9    0.45      0.17      5.5    —    64
 28    Flour, Whole          12.2      341     69.4   12.1   1.7     2.7      1.9       48      11.5   0.49      0.29      4.3    0    29
 29    Flour, Refined        13.3      348     73.9   11.0   0.9     0.6      0.3       23       2.5   0.12      0.07      2.4    0    25
 23    Suji (Rawa)           13.1      348     74.8   10.4   0.8     —        0.2       16       1.6   0.12      0.03      1.6    0    —
 25    Vermicelli            11.7      352     78.3    8.7   0.4     0.7      0.2       22       2.0   0.19      0.05      1.8    0     0
 606   Bread, white          39.0      245     51.9    7.8   0.7     —        0.2       11       1.1   0.07       —        0.7    —    —
       Millets
 1     Bajra                 12.4      361     67.5   11.6   5.0     2.3      1.2        42     5.0    0.33      0.25      2.3    0    132
 8     Jowar (Cholam)        11.9      349     72.6   10.4   1.9     1.6      1.6        25     5.8    0.37      0.13      3.1    0     47
 9     Maize, dry            14.9      342     66.2   11.1   3.6     1.5      2.7        10     2.0    0.42      0.10      1.8    0     90
 13    Ragi (Nachni)         13.1      328     72.0    7.3   1.3     2.7      3.6       344     6.4    0.42      0.19      1.4    0     42
       Other millets         11.9      334     66.0   10.7   3.3     2.3      6.7        22     6.7    0.35      0.12      2.6    0     34
 6     Maize, tender (Makka)           125     24.6   4.7    0.9     0.8      1.9        9      1.1    0.11      0.17      0.6    6     32
       Pulses
       Dals
 32    Bengal gram            9.9      372     59.8   20.8   5.6     2.7      1.2        56     9.1    0.48      0.18      2.4    1    129
 34    Black gram            10.9      347     59.6   24.0   1.4     3.2      0.9       154     9.1    0.42      0.37      2.0    0     38
 38    Green gram            10.1      348     59.9   24.5   1.2     3.5      0.8        75     8.5    0.72      0.15      2.4    0     49
 46    Red gram              13.4      335     57.6   22.3   1.7     3.5      1.5        73     5.8    0.45      0.19      2.9    0    132




                                                                                                                                              375
                                                                                                                                 (Contd...)
                                                                                                                            376
1     2                        3      4      5     6       7      8    9     10      11     12     13     14     15   16

      Whole
31    Bengal gram               9.8   360   60.9   17.1    5.3   3.0   3.9   202    10.2    0.30   0.15   2.9    3    189
35    Cowpeas (Chawli) small   13.4   323   54.5   24.1   1.0    3.2   3.8    77    5.9     0.51   0.20   1.3    0    12
37    Green gram               10.4   334   56.7   24.0    1.3   3.5   4.1   124     7.3    0.47   0.39   2.1    0     94
41    Lentil (masur)           12.4   343   59.0   25.1    0.7   2.1   0.7    69     4.8    0.45   0.20   2.6    0    270
43    Peas, dry                16.0   315   56.5   19.7    1.1   2.2   4.5    75     5.1    0.47   0.19   3.4    0     39
45    Rajmah                   12.0   346   60.6   22.9    1.3   3.2         260    5.8      —      —     —      —    —
42    Moth bean                10.8   330   56.5   23.6    1.1   3.5   4.5   202     9.5    0.45   0.09   1.5    2      9
47    Soyabean                  8.1   432   20.9   43.2   19.5   4.6   3.7   240    11.5    0.73   0.39   3.2    —    426
      Other beans                     334   23.4   23.4   0.6                173    5.5     0.47   0.18   1.6    —    —

      NUTS AND OILSEEDS
282   Groundnut                3.0    567   26.1   25.3   40.1   2.4   3.1     90     2.8   0.90   0.13   19.9   0    37
283   Groundnut, Roasted       1.7    570   26.7   26.2   39.8   2.5   3.1     77     3.1   0.39   0.13   22.1   0     0
287   Til (Seasame, ginelly)   5.3    563   25.0   18.3   43.0   5.2   2.9   1450    10.5   1.01   0.34    4.4   0    60
280   Gardencress seeds        3.2    454   33.0   25.3    24    6.4   7.6    377   100.0   0.59   0.61   14.3   0    27




                                                                                                                            Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy
648   Poppy seeds (khaskhas)   4.3    408   36.8   21.7    19    9.9   8.0                                       —    —
662   Watermelon seeds         4.3    628    4.5   34.1    53    6.4   7.6   100     7.4    0.13   0.20   1.3    —    —
      Treenuts
279   Cocunut, fresh           36.3   444   13.0    4.5   42     1.0   3.6    10     1.7    0.05   0.10   0.8    1    0
278   Cocunut, dry              4.3   662   18.4    6.8   62     1.6   6.6    40     2.7    0.08   0.01   3.0    7    0
276   Cashew                    5.9   596   22.3   21.2   47     2.4   1.3    50     5.0    0.63   0.19   1.2    0    —
275   Almond                    5.2   655   10.5   20.8   59     2.9   1.7   230     4.5    0.24   0.57   4.4    0    0

      MILK AND MILK PRODUCTS 3
568   Milk, cow’s       87.5           67    4.4    3.2    4.1   0.8   —     120    0.02    0.05   0.19   0.1    2    52
567   Milk, buffalo’s   81.0          117    5.0    4.3    8.8   0.8   —     210     0.2    0.04   0.10   0.1    1    48
569   Milk, goat’s      86.8           72    4.6    3.3    4.5   0.8   —     170     0.3    0.05   0.01   0.3    1    55
572   Curds             89.1           60    3.0    3.1    4.0   0.8   —     149     0.2    0.05   0.16   0.1    1    31
573   Butter milk       97.5           30    0.5    0.8    1.1   0.1   —      30     0.8     —      —     —      —     0
577   Cheese            40.3          348    6.3   24.1   25.1   4.2   —     790     2.1     —      —     —      —    82
576   Channa            54.1          292    7.9   13.4   23.0   1.6   —     480     —       —      —     —      —    —
579   Khoya             30.6          421   20.5   14.6   31.2   3.1   —     650     5.8     —      —     —      —    —
                                                                                                                                                          Appendices
1      2                        3       4        5        6          7         8     9      10        11      12     13     14          15           16

583   Whole milk powder 3.5            496     38.0     25.8        26.7     6.0    —        950     0.6     0.31   1.36   0.8     4         420
582   Skimmed milk      4.1            357     51.0     38.0         0.1     6.8    —       1370     1.4     0.45   1.64   1.0     5          0
      powder
      EGG AND MEAT
547   Egg, hen                73.7     173     —        13.3        13.3     1.0    —        60      2.1     0.10   0.40    0.1     0         960
556   Mutton                  71.5     194     —        18.5        13.3     1.3    —       150      2.5     0.18   0.14    6.8    —           0
552   Goat meat               74.2     118     —        21.4         3.6     1.1    —        12      —        —      —      —      —           —
551   Chicken                 72.2     109     —        26.0        0.6      1.3    —       25       —        —     0.14    —      —           —
541   Beef, Muscle            74.3     114     —        22.6         2.6     1.0    —        10      0.8     0.15   0.04    6.4     2          0
559   Pork, Muscle            77.4     114     —        18.7         4.4     1.0    —        30      2.2     0.54   0.09    2.8     2          0
555   Liver, sheep            70.4     150     —        19.3         7.5     1.5    1.3      10      6.3     0.36   1.70   17.6    20        6,690
      Fish
502   Pomfrets                78.4       87    1.3       17.0        1.3     1.3    1.5       200     0.9     —     0.15   2.6     —          —
460   Hilsa                   53.7      273    2.9       21.8       19.4     2.9    2.2       180     2.1     —      —     2.8     24         —
483   Mangalore               78.1       98    —         22.1        1.1     0.5    —          40     1.6    0.10    —     2.5     —          —
503   Prawn, fresh            77.4       89    0.8       19.1        1.0     1.7    —         323     5.3    0.01   0.10   4.8     —          0
      Fish, fresh, low fat            76–126          14.7–25.2   0.6–4.7                  71–1070 0.8–6.8    —      —     0.6     —          —
      Fish, fresh, high fat          130–170          11.2–19.4   5.8–12.1                180–1605 0.5–4.4    —      —     2.2     —          —
      Fish, dry                      255–413            55–76     2.7–17.0                315–38.45 3–50      —      —     —       —          —
519   Shell fish, dry          6.0      349    —         68.1        8.5     17.4   —        4380     —       —      —     —       —          —
447   Crab muscle             83.5       59    3.3        8.9        1.1     3.2    —        1370    21.2     —      —     3.1     —         780
448   Crab, small             65.3      169    9.1       11.2        9.8     4.6    —        1606     —       —      —     —       —          —

      LEAFY VEGETABLES
      Miscellaneous
      Dark green                       22                2.4        0.3                     166      2.9     0.09   0.19   0.8     70 3560–14,000
      Light green                      18                1.5        0.1                      55      1.1     0.16   0.08   0.4    5–61 126–3000
51    Amaranth, tender        85.7     45      6.1       4.0        0.5      2.7    1.0     397      25.5    0.03   0.30   1.2      99   5,520
52    Ambatchuka              95.2     15      1.4       1.6        0.8      0.9    0.6      63       8.7    0.03   0.06   0.2      12   3,660
55    Bathua leaves           89.6     30      2.9       3.7        0.4      2.6    0.8     150       4.2    0.01   0.14   0.6      35   1,740
61    Cabbage                 91.9     27      4.6       1.8        0.1      0.6    1.0      39       0.8    0.06   0.09   0.4     124   1,200
71    Colocasia (green)       78.8     56      8.1       3.9        1.5      2.5    1.8     227      10.0    0.22   0.26   1.1      12  10,270




                                                                                                                                                          377
      leaves
                                                                                                                                         378
1     2                   3     4     5       6       7        8    9       10      11          12       13        14    15       16

74    Coriander leaves   86.3   44    6.3    3.3      0.6     2.3   1.2    184      18.5       0.05      0.06     0.8    135     6,918
77    Drumstick leaves   75.9   92   12.5    6.7      1.7     2.3   0.9    440       7.0       0.06      0.05     0.8    220     6,780
78    Methi leaves       86.1   49    6.0    4.4      0.9     1.5   1.1    395      16.5       0.04      0.31     0.8     52     2,340
101   Lettuce            93.4   21    2.5    2.1      0.3     1.2   0.5     50       2.4       0.09      0.13     0.5     10      990
130   Radish leaves      90.8   28    2.4    3.8      0.4     1.6   1.0    265       3.6       0.18      0.47     0.8     81     5,300
144   Palak (spinach)    92.1   26    2.9    2.0      0.7     1.7   0.6     73      10.9       0.03      0.26     0.5     28     5,580
      BULBS AND TUBERS
163   Beetroot      87.7        43    8.8    1.7      0.1     0.8   0.9     18       1.0       0.04      0.09     0.4     10       0
167   Carrot        86.0        48   10.6    0.9      0.2     1.1   1.2     80       2.2       0.04      0.02     0.6      3     1,890
189   Radish, white 94.4        17    3.4    0.7      0.1     0.6   0.8     35       0.4       0.06      0.02     0.5     15       0
182   Onion         86.6        50   11.1    1.2      0.1     0.4   0.6     47       0.7       0.08      0.01     0.4      2       0
      STARCHY TUBERS, ROOTS
185   Potato            74.7  97     22.6    1.6      0.1     0.6   0.4     10       0.7       0.10      0.01     1.2     17      *
170   Colocasia         73.1  97     21.1    3.0      0.1     1.7   1.0     40       1.7       0.09      0.03     0.4      0      —
192   Tapioca (Cassava) 59.4 157     38.1    0.7      0.2     1.0   0.6     50       0.9       0.05      0.10     0.3     25      —
197   Yam, elephant     78.7  79     18.4    1.2      0.1     0.8   0.8     50       0.6       0.06      0.07     0.7      0     260




                                                                                                                                         Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy
      (Suran)
      OTHER VEGETABLES
212   Brinjal        92.7    24      4.0     1.4      0.3     0.3   1.3     18       0.9       0.04      0.11     0.9     12      74
214   Cauliflower    90.8    30      4.0     2.6      0.4     1.0   1.2     33       1.5       0.04      0.10     1.0     56      30
223   Drumstick      86.9    26      3.7     2.5      0.1     2.0   4.8     30       5.3       0.05      0.07     0.2    120     110
229   Giant chillis  92.4    24      4.3     1.3      0.3     0.7   1.0     10       1.2       0.55      0.05     0.1    137     420
      (capsicum)
238   Knol-Knol      92.7    21      3.8     1.1      0.2     0.7   1.5     20       0.4       0.05      0.09     0.5     85      20
208   Bitter gourd   92.4    25      4.2     1.6      0.2     0.8   0.8     20       1.8       0.07      0.09     0.5     88     125
      (Karela)
      Other gourds          14                0.4     0.1                   23       0.6        0.04      0.02     0.3     3      60
      Stems                 18                0.6     0.2                   60       0.9        0.02      0.07     0.2     8      —
227   Beans, french  91.4    26       4.5     1.7     0.1     0.5   1.8      50      1.7        0.08      0.06     0.3     24     130
218   Beans, cluster 81.0    60      10.8     3.2     0.4     1.4   3.2     130      4.5        0.09      0.03     0.6     49     200
250   Peas           72.1    93      15.9     7.2     0.1     0.8   4.0      20      1.5        0.25      0.01     0.8      9      80
258   Redgram tender 65.1   116      16.9     9.8     1.0     1.0   6.2      57      1.1        0.32      0.33     3.0     25     470
      Other beans         48–158            3.5–8.3 0.1–0.7               40–210   1.4–2.6   0.07–0.34 0.06—0.19 0.7–0.9 12–27   9565
                                                                                                                      Appendices
1     2                     3       4      5     6     7     8     9     10   11    12     13     14    15     16

      VITAMIN C-RICH FRUITS
317   Amla             81.8         58    13.7   0.5   0.1   0.5   3.4   50   1.2   0.03   0.01   0.2   600     9
334   Cashew Fruit     86.3         51    12.3   0.2   0.1   0.2   0.9   10   0.2   0.02   0.05   0.4   180    23
347   Guava, country   81.7         51    11.2   0.9   0.3   0.7   5.2   10   1.4   0.03   0.03   0.4   212     0
357   Chinch, Vilayti  79.2         78    16.0   2.7   0.4   0.7   1.0   14   1.0   0.22   0.06   1.6   108     0

      CITRUS FRUITS
346   Grape Fruit          92.0     32     7.0   0.7   0.1   0.2   —     20   0.2   0.12   0.02   0.3   31   —
361   Lemon                85.0     57    11.1   1.0   0.9   0.3   1.7   70   2.3   0.02   0.01   0.1   39    0
362   Lemon, sweet         90.5     35     7.3   0.7   0.3   0.5   0.7   30   0.7    —     0.04    0    45    0
365   Lime                 84.6     59    10.9   1.5   1.0   0.7   1.3   90   0.3   0.02   0.03   0.1   63   15
366   Lime, sweet, malta   90.3     36     7.8   0.7   0.2   0.4   0.6   30   1.0    —      —      0    54    0
367   Mausambi             88.4     43     9.3   0.8   0.3   0.7   0.5   40   0.7    —      —      0    50    0
380   Orange               87.6     65    10.9   0.7   0.2   0.3   0.3   26   0.3    —      —     —     30 1,104
381   Orange juice         97.7     48     1.9   0.2   0.1   0.1   —      5   0.7   0.06   0.02   0.4   64   15
400   Pummelo papanas      88.0     44    10.2   0.6   0.1   0.5   0.6   30   0.3   0.03   0.03   0.2   20 120

      OTHER VIT. C-RICH FRUITS
332   Cape gooseberry      82.9      53   11.1   1.8   0.2   0.8   3.2   10   2.0   0.05   0.02   0.3   49 1,425
352   Jamb, safed          93.5      19    3.7   0.1   0.4   0.1   2.2   17   0.1   0.01   0.02   0.2   30   —
363   Lichi                84.1      61   13.6   1.1   0.2   0.5   0.5   10   0.7   0.02   0.06   0.4   31    0
374   Melon, musk (kharbooja)95.2    17    3.5   0.3   0.2   0.4   0.4   32   1.4   0.11   0.08   0.3   26 170
375   Papaya, ripe         90.8      32    7.2   0.6   0.1   0.5   0.8   17   0.5   0.04   0.25   0.2   57 665
394   Pineapple            87.8      46   10.8   0.4   0.1   0.4   0.5   20   1.2   0.20   0.12   0.1   39    *
407   Seetaphal            70.5     104   23.5   1.6   0.4   0.9   3.1   17   1.5   0.33   0.44   1.3   37    0
410   Strawberry           87.8      44    9.8   0.7   0.2   0.4   1.1   30   1.8   0.03   0.02   0.2   52   15
413   Tomato, ripe         94.0      20    3.6   0.9   0.2   0.5   0.8   48   0.4   0.12   0.06   0.4   27 350

      OTHER FRUITS
318   Apple                84.6      59   13.4   0.2   0.5   0.3   1.0   10   1.0    —      —      0     1       0
319   Apriot, fresh        85.3      53   11.6   1.0   0.3   0.7   1.1   20   2.2   0.04   0.13   0.6    6    2,160
322   Bael fruit           61.5     137   31.8   1.8   0.3   1.7   2.9   85   0.6   0.13   1.19   1.1    3      55
325   Banana, ripe         70.1     116   27.2   1.2   0.3   0.8   0.4   17   0.9   0.05   0.08   0.5    7      78




                                                                                                                      379
                                                                                                                            380
1     2                        3     4      5      6       7      8     9     10     11     12     13     14    15    16

335   Cherries, red           83.4    64   13.8   1.1     0.5    0.8   0.4     24    1.3    0.08   0.08   0.3    7    0
341   Figs (Anjeer)           88.1    37    7.6   1.3     0.2    0.6   2.2     80    1.0    0.06   0.05   0.6    5  162
      Grapes (average)        81.0    65   15.0   0.5     0.3    0.4   0.8     20    0.5    0.04   0.03   0.2    1    *
351   Jackfruit               76.2    88   19.8   1.9     0.1    0.9   1.1     20    0.5    0.03   0.13   0.4    7  175
      Plantain ripe                  135          1.2     0.3                  8     1.3    0.08   0.04   0.6   20 780
370   Mango, ripe             81.0    74   16.9   0.6     0.4    0.4   0.7     14    1.3    0.08   0.09   0.9   16 2,740
375   Melon, water            95.8    16    3.3   0.2     0.2    0.3   0.2     11    7.9    0.02   0.04   0.1    1    0
      Peaches, pears, plums   86.0    50   11.1   0.8     0.3    0.5   0.9     10    0.6    0.04   0.03   0.3    4   —
387   Passion fruit           76.3    54   12.4   0.9     0.1    0.7   9.6     10    2.0    0.07   0.14   1.6   25   54
388   Passion fruit juice     89.0    37    7.7   1.2     0.2    0.7   1.2     10    0.7    0.01   0.02    0    13 1,970
398   Pomegranate             78.0    65   14.5   1.6     0.1    0.7   5.1     10    0.3    0.06   0.10   0.3   16    0
406   Sapota (Chiku)          73.7    98   21.4   0.7     1.1    0.5   2.6     28    2.0    0.02   0.03   0.2    6   95
418   Kavath (wood apple)     64.2   134   18.1   7.1     3.7    1.9   5.0    130    0.6    0.04   0.17   0.8    3   61

      FRUITS, DRIED
320   Apricots                19.4   306   73.4   1.6     0.7    2.8   2.1    110    4.6    0.22    —     2.3    2    60




                                                                                                                            Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy
337   Currants, black         18.4   316   75.2   2.7     0.5    2.2   1.0    130    8.5    0.03   0.14   0.4    1    20
338   Dates (khajur)          15.3   317   75.8   2.5     0.4    2.1   3.9    120    7.3    0.01   0.02   0.9    3    25
402   Raisins                 20.2   308   74.6   1.8     0.5    2.0   1.1     87    7.7    0.07   0.19   0.7    1     *

      CONDIMENTS
301   Coriander seeds       11.2     288   21.6   14.1   16.1    4.4   32.6    630   18.0   0.22   0.35   1.1     0   940
302   Cumin seeds           11.9     356   36.6   18.7   15.0    5.8   12.0   1080   31.0   0.55   0.36   2.6     3   520
303   Fenugreck seeds (methi)13.7    335   44.1   26.2   5.8     3.0   7.2    160    14.1   0.34   0.29   1.1    0    95
311   Onva (ajwain)          7.4     360   24.6   17.1   21.8    7.9   21.2   1525   27.7   0.21   0.28   2.1     0    70
298   Chillies, green       85.7      29    3.0    2.9    0.6    1.0    6.8     30    1.2   0.19   0.39   0.9   111   175
297   Chillies, dry         10.0     246   31.6   15.9    6.2    6.1   30.2    160    2.3   0.93   0.43   9.5    50   345

      FATS AND OILS
584   Butter                  19.0   730   —      —       81.0   2.5   —      —      —      —      —      —     —     960
585   Ghee (cow)               —     900   —      —      100.0   —     —      —      —      —      —      —     —     960
586   Ghee (buffalo)           —     900   —      —      100.0   —     —      —      —      —      —      —     —     270
                                                                                                                                                       Appendices
 1      2                          3      4         5       6       7         8         9        10       11     12       13        14    15    16


 587    Vanaspati (fortified)     —      900       —       —      100.0       —         —        —        —      —        —         —     —    750
 588    Vegetable oil             —      900       —       —      100.0       —         —        —        —      —        —         —     —     0
        Vegetable oil (refined,   —       90               —      100.0       —         —        —        —      —        —         —     —    750
        fortified)

        MISCELLANEOUS
 592    Arrow root flour          16.5   334      83.1     0.2     0.1       0.1       —         10      1.0     —        —        —      —     —
 596    Betel leaves              85.4    44       6.1     3.1     0.8       2.3       2.3      230      7.0    0.07     0.03      0.7     5 5,760
 603    Biscuits, salted           4.5   534      54.6     4.5     6.6       1.9       —         —       —       —        —        —      —     —
 604    Biscuits, sweet            5.4   450      71.9     5.4     6.4       1.1       —         —       —       —        —        —      —     —
 607    Sugar-cane                 0.4   398      99.4     0.4     0.1       0.1        0         1      —       —        —        —      —     —
 613    Cocunut, tender           90.8    41       6.3     0.9     1.4       0.6       —         10      0.9     —        —        —       2    —
 615    Cocunut water             93.8    24       4.4     1.4     0.1       0.3        0        24      0.1    0.01       0       0.1     2     0
 621    Fish liver oil             —     900       —       —       100       —         —        —        —       —        —        —      20,0004-
                                                                                                                                          1,00,0000
 623    Honey                     20.6   320      79.5     0.3       0       0.2       —          5       0.9     0      0.04       0.2    4     0
 624    Jackfruit seeds           64.5   133      25.8     6.6      0.4      1.2       1.5       50       1.5   0.25     0.11       0.3   11    10
 625    Jaggery, cane              3.9   383      95.0     0.4      0.1      0.6       —         80      11.4   0.02     0.04       0.5    0   165
 642    Mushroom                  88.5    43       4.3     4.6      0.8      1.4       0.4        6       1.5   0.14     0.16       2.4   12     0
 645    Papad                     20.3   288      52.4    18.8      0.3      8.2       —         80      17.2     0       —         —     —      0
 654    Sago                      12.2   351      87.1     0.2      0.2      0.3       —         10       1.3   0.01      —         0.2   —     —
 657    Sugarcane juice           90.2    39       9.1     0.1      0.2      0.4       —         10       1.1    —       0.04       —     —     —
 663    Yeast, dried Brewer’s     13.6   320      39.1    39.5      0.6      7.0       0.2      440      43.7   6.00      4.0      40.0    0    65
 664    Yeast, dried, food         7.8   344      46.3    35.7      1.8      8.4       —        160      21.5   3.20      —        27.0    0    —


1. Selected from Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, by Gopalan, C. et al., Indian Council of Medical Research Publication, 1971, pp. 60–114.
2. The numbers refer to serial numbers in ICMR publication mentioned above.
3. Milk and Milk products: Vitamin A value is given I.U.s.
4. Preformed Vitamin A in Cod liver oil–20,000 to 70,000 mcg; about 70,000 mcg; in shark liver oil; and 1,000,000 mcg per 100g in halibut liver oil.
Note: Abbreviations and Symbols: Cal.–Kilo calories: mg–milligram; *–negligile; mcg–microgram; Vit.–Vitamin–Value not reported.




                                                                                                                                                       381
                                                                                                                                                      382
Appendix G — Weight for Height for Age, 1–18 years, Girls1,2

Height Weight kg                                                           Age Years
 cm Mean Weight      1      2     3      4      5      6      7      8        9        10     11     12     13     14       15     16   17     18

 60        5.3      5.3
 65        6.5      6.3    6.7
 70        7.4      7.3    7.4
 75        8.4      8.2    8.5   8.7
 80        9.7      9.4    9.5   9.8    10.1
 85       10.8            10.4   10.8   10.8   11.0
 90       11.8            11.6   11.7   11.8   11.9   12.0
 95       12.8                   12.7   12.8   12.9   13.0   13.0
 100      14.4                          14.0   14.0   14.2   14.5   14.8
 105      15.4                          15.3   15.3   15.4   15.4   15.4     15.5
 110      17.0                                 16.8   16.8   16.9   16.9     16.9      17.2




                                                                                                                                                      Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy
 115      18.6                                 18.4   18.4   18.5   18.5     18.6      18.5   18.8
 120      20.6                                        20.2   20.3   20.4     20.4      20.5   20.7   21.0
 125      22.6                                               22.2   22.2     22.3      22.6   22.6   22.9   23.0
 130      24.7                                                      24.2     24.4      24.5   24.8   24.9   25.3
 135      28.5                                                               27.1      27.4   27.8   28.0   28.5   29.0   31.0
 140      33.1                                                                         29.3   29.8   30.5   31.8   33.1   34.9   36.0   36.7   37.4
 145      36.3                                                                         32.6   33.0   33.4   34.9   36.3   37.8   38.8   39.2   39.8
 150      40.1                                                                                       37.3   38.3   39.3   40.1   41.3   42.5   45.5
 155      42.9                                                                                              40.5   42.1   42.9   44.0   44.7   45.5
 160      46.1                                                                                                                   45.3   46.2   46.1

1. Growth and Physical Development of Indian Infants and Children, ICMR Technical Report Series No. 18, adapted from Table 13, pp. 70–73,
   1972.
2. The fiftieth percentile is given.
                                                                                                                                                 Appendices
Appendix H — Weight for Height for Age, 1–18 years, boys1,2

Height Weight kg                                                          Age Years
 cm Mean Weight     1     2      3      4      5      6      7      8        9        10     11     12     13     14     15     16     17   18

 65       7.0      7.0
 70       7.6      7.5   7.6
 75       8.7      8.5   8.7    8.8
 80       9.9      9.8   9.9    9.9    10.0
 85       10.8           10.7   10.8   11.0   11.0
 90       12.0           11.9   12.0   12.1   12.1
 95       13.1                  13.0   13.1   13.2   13.2
100       14.3                  14.2   14.3   14.3   14.4   14.6
105       15.5                         15.4   15.5   15.5   15.5   15.6
110       17.0                                16.9   17.0   17.0   17.0     17.1
115       18.5                                       18.4   18.5   18.5     18.7      18.5   18.9
120       20.2                                       20.4   20.1   20.1     20.2      20.5   20.6   21.0
125       22.5                                              22.2   22.3     22.3      22.5   22.7   22.5   22.7
130       24.6                                                     24.3     24.3      24.4   24.6   24.7   25.1   24.8
135       27.1                                                              26.6      26.6   27.0   27.1   27.2   27.5   27.7
140       29.5                                                                        28.8   29.3   29.5   29.8   29.9   30.2   29.9
145       33.2                                                                               32.0   32.3   32.6   33.2   33.3   33.3 34.9
150       36.3                                                                                      35.5   36.1   36.2   36.3   38.0 39.2 41.4
155       40.8                                                                                      38.7   39.2   39.8   40.8   41.3 42.1 43.3
160       44.7                                                                                             43.7   43.2   43.5   44.7 45.3 46.7
165       47.3                                                                                                    46.2   47.1   47.3 48.4 49.0
170       51.0                                                                                                           49.8   50.9 51.6 51.8


1. Growth and Physical Development of Indian Infants and Children, ICMR Technical Report Series No. 18, adapted from Table 13,
   pp. 70–73, 1972.




                                                                                                                                                 383
2. The fiftieth percentile is given.
                           Appendix I – Glossary


Absorption The uptake of the end products of digestion through the cell membranes of the digestive
         tract and into the blood and lymph circulation.
Adapt Modify or alter to suit new use.
Adolescence Period of years between the beginning of puberty (when the reproductive organs become
         functionally active) and maturity. In humans it is between eleven and fifteen years for girls
         fourteen and eighteen years for boys.
Agar An indigestible polysaccharide prepared by drying and purifying moss and seaweed; swells with
         water to form a gel and is often used to relieve constipation; also called agar-agar and is used
         in microbiological analysis as an inert medium to grow microorganisms.
Alcoholism Chronic and excessive use of alcohol and normal breathing is disturbed.
Aldehyde One of a large class of organic substances derived from a primary alcohol by oxidation;
         contains the characteristic group CHO.
Aleurone layer The single layer of large cells between the bran coat and endosperm of cereal grains.
         Rich in protein, minerals and vitamins.
Amino acids Organic compounds containing the elements carbon, hydrogen, oxygen and nitrogen.
         Each amino acids contain one or more amino (–NH2) and one or more carboxyl (–COOH)
         group. In addition some contain sulphur. Many amino acids linked together in some definite
         pattern form a protein molecule.
Amphoteric A compound that has at least one group that act as an acid and one group that can act as
         a base; describes proteins and amino acids, which carry both negative and positive charges
         in the molecules. At the pH at which the substance becomes electrically neutral, it precipitates
         from solution.
Amylase Enzymes (salivary and pancreatic) that hydrolyse starch and glycogen to maltose; ptyalin,
         amylopsin.
Anaemia Reduction in the number of red blood cells, packed cell volume or circulating haemoglobin,
         resulting in pallor in appearance.
Anaerobic Living in absence of air, a chemical reaction, which occurs in the absence of oxygen.
Angina Pectoris Pain in the heart muscle due to reduction in blood supply.
Annatto Yellow colouring matter.
Anorexia Loss of appetite.
Appendices                                                                                            385

Anorexia nervosa Loss of appetite due to psychological stress.
Antibody A protein produced in an organism as a response to the presence of an antigen (foreign
          body).
Antibiotic A substance produced by living organisms that inhibits the growth of other organisms, used
          as a food preservative in some countries.
Antifoaming Agents Substance which reduce foaming caused by the presence of dissolved proteins
          or other substances.
Antioxidants substances which retard the oxidative changes (rancidity) in fats and oils, e.g., tocopherols.
Anthropometry The science which deals with the measurement of size, weight and proportions of the
          human body.
Antivitamin A substance that inactivates a vitamin or inhibits its synthesis.
Aponea suspension of breathing.
Arachodonic acid A fatty acid, containing 20–carbon atoms with four double bonds, in the body it is
          synthesised from the essential fatty acid, linoleic acid.
Arrowroot Starchy substance obtained from the root of arrowroot plant, almost pure starch.
Atherosclerosis narrowing of arterial walls due to deposits of fatty material (plaques), with resistance
          to blood flow and increased blood pressure. Increased blood pressure injures the arterial
          wall further, thus worsening the atherosclerosis.
Autoimmune disease occur when body’s immune defenses attack the body itself, the antibodies
          produced attack its cells and organs.
Autolysis Process of self-digestion by the enzymes naturally present in the tissue which may lead to
          deterioration of quality (especially in fresh foods).
Availability of nutrients Nutrients, free to be absorbed from the intestine into the blood.
Basal Metabolism Energy used by the body, during physical, digestive and emotional rest (usually
          determined 12 hours after ingestion of food).
Beriberi A deficiency disease due to lack of thiamin, characterised by polyneuritis, edema (in some
          cases), emaciation and cardiac disturbances (enlargement of heart and a very rapid heartbeat).
Beta-carotone A fat soluble plant pigment, which is precursor of vitamin A.
Bile acids Acids (glycocholic and taurocholic) formed in the liver and secreted in the bile.
Bioavailability The degree to which a drug or other substances become available to the target tissue.
Biological value The relative nutritional value of a protein as compared to a high quality protein such
          as egg protein.
Blood cells (corpuscles) These include red blood cells (erythrocytes) and white blood cells (leukocytes).
Bone matrix The protein groundwork in which minerals are deposited.
Buffer Substance which resists change in pH (alkalinity and acidity).
Calcification Process by which an organic tissue becomes hardened by a deposit of calcium salts.
Capillary A minute blood vessel connecting the small arteries (arterioles) and small veins (venules).
          Exchange of materials between the blood and tissues takes place through the walls of the
          capillaries.
386                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Calorimeter An instrument used for measuring the heat or energy produced (e.g., by oxidation of a
          food).
Carbondioxide Colourless, odourless gas formed by oxidation of carbon produced in tissues and
          eliminated by lungs.
Carcinogen A substance, which triggers abnormal cell growth.
Caries Tooth decay.
Carotenoids A group of fat-soluble, yellow-orange plant pigments.
Carrier A person in apparent good health, who harbors pathogenic microorganisms and passes these
          on to others.
Cassava (Tapioca) Tropical plant with edible, starchy roots.
Catalyst A substance which increases the rate of a chemical reaction without being used up by in the
          reaction.
Cation lon with positive charge, e.g., Sodium, Calcium.
Cell The smallest structural and functional unit of plant and animal organisms.
Cellulose A polysaccharide constituent of plant which passes undigested through the human digestive
          tract.
Chemotherapy Treatment of a diseased tissue with chemical drugs.
Chlorophyll Green plant pigment, used to manufacture carbohydrates from simple salts and carbon
          dioxide using energy derived from sunlight.
Cholosterol A solid alcohol (sterol) which is synthesised in animal tissue, and is essential for normal
          function.
Cirrhosis Generic term for liver disease with formation of fibrous scar tissue, with loss of cells
          disrupting normal liver function; occurs in malnourished adults (due to excessive alcohol
          intake) and highly malnourished children.
Coagulate Curdle, clot form into a mass, congeal, solidity. Proteins coagulate due to heat and/or
          change of pH.
Coenzyme A helper needed by some enzymes to accomplish a biochemical change.
Cofactor Non-protein part required by some enzymes for their activity.
Coliform bacteria Group of aerobic lactose fermentors. Generally not harmful but their presence
          indicates lack of sanitation.
Complement system is a group of proteins, which interact with each other in a stepwise progression
          to bring about antigen-antibody reactions.
Conjunctiva Fine membrane covering eyeball and lining the eyelid.
Colloid Fine particles suspended in either solid, liquid or gaseous phases.
Colostrum Fluid secreted during the first week of lactation.
Constipation Difficulty in emptying bowels; usually due to lack of water and/or fibre in the diet.
Contamination Entry of undesirable organisms in some material or object.
Corn, opaque-2 Genetically developed corn with higher than normal amounts of lysine and tryptophan.
Cretinism Dwarfism usually caused in the infant due to severe depletion of iodine of the mother in her
Appendices                                                                                              387

          pregnancy resulting in her inability to supply iodine for the development of the foetus. It is
          characterised by low basal metabolism, muscular flabbiness and weakness, dryness of the
          skin, arrest of skeletal development and severe mental retardation.
Crystallisation Form into crystals, usually from a super saturated solution by the seeding of a very
          small quantity of the crystalline compound.
Deamination Removal of an amino group from a compound.
Deficiency disease A disease resulting from inadequate dietary intake of something required nutritionally.
Dehydration The loss of water from the body, which is not compensated by intake of water.
Dementia Mental disorder resulting in impairment of transfer of nerve impulses.
Denaturation Structural change in proteins due to effect of heat, light, change in pH, etc. Results in
          change of solubility. May be reversible, if conditions are mild but mostly irreversible changes
          occur.
Deodourisation Removal of flavour or odour of fats during refining.
DNA Deoxyribonucleic Acid Substance forming the genetic material in most organisms.
Dermatitis Inflammation of the skin.
Dextrins Mixture of water soluble compounds formed by partial breakdown of starch by heat, acid or
          enzymes.
Diabetes mellitus is a genetic disease of metabolism in which there is a partial or total inability to
          synthesise insulin; it is characterised by the partial loss of ability or complete inability of the
          tissue to use carbohydrates. Hyperglycemia, glycosuria and excessive urination occur.
          It is a chronic degenerative disease, in which the body lacks the normal ability to metabolize
          glucose.
Dialysis mechanical filtration of the blood; used when kidneys are no longer able to function normally.
Diarrhoea Rapid movement of food matter through the digestive tract resulting in watery stools.
          Leads to dehydration and profound cellular disturbances.
Diastolic pressure Blood pressure measured when heart is at rest.
Diffusion Movements of molecul es from high concentration areas to low ones.
Digestion Mechanical and chemical breakdown of food to simple substances which can be absorbed
          and used by the body cells.
Disaccharide Carbohydrate consisting of two monosaccharide units.
Diuretics substances used to increase the amount of urine excreted.
Duodenum First portion of the small intenstine.
Edema (Odema) Excess accumulation of fluid in the intercellular spaces of the body.
Element Any one of the fundamental atoms of which all matter is composed.
Emaciation Wasted condition of body due mainly to lack of food, wherein the fat reserves and muscles
          to a certain extent are used up for sustenance of life.
Emphysema A lung disease in which surface area of lungs is reduced and normal breathing is disturbed.
Enamel Calcified tissue covering crown of a tooth.
Endemic disease Disease, which occurs, regularly in a given region and affects health adversely for a
          long time.
388                                                     Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Endogeneous Produced within the organism.
Enteric Pertaining to the intestines.
Enzyme Protein formed in plant and animal cells, which acts as a catalyst for certain specific reactions.
Epidemic An epidemic disease spreads rapidly and affects many people of a given region.
Epithelial Cells that form the outer layer of the skin, respiratory, gastrointestinal, urinary, reproductive
           tract and also of eyes, nose, ears, throat, lungs, liver and kidney.
Erythropoietin A hormone produced by kidneys, which stimulates maturation of red blood cells in the
           bone marrow.
Esophagus Hollow muscular tube connecting the mouth and stomach.
Ester Chemical name for a compound formed by reaction of an acid and an alcohol. Fats are esters of
           an alcohol (Glycerol) and fatty acids such as stearic, oleic, etc.
Exchange lists Lists of foods with interchangeable nutrient and kcal contents; used in specific forms
           of diet therapy such as diabetic and heart ailment diets.
Excreta Products of digestion and metabolism that are discarded from the body—faeces from the
           intestinal tract and urine from the kidneys.
Extracellular fluid Fluid outside the cell consist of tissue fluid, blood plasma, cerbrospinal fluid, fluid
           in the eye and fluid of the gastro-intestinal tract.
Fatty acid Organic acids composed of carbon, hydrogen and oxygen. They combine with glycerol to
           form fats and oils.
Fecal matter Solid waste from large intestine.
Fermentation Breakdown of compounds without the use of oxygen, e.g., breakdown of sugar by
           yeast to form alcohol and carbon dioxide.
Fibrosis Development of tough, stringy tissue.
Flora (Intestinal) Bacteria and other small organisms that live in the intestine.
Fluids Liquids or gas.
Fomite An inanimate object that carries living organisms.
FAO Food and Agriculture Organisations of the United Nations, established in 1945, to improve food
           production, distribution and consumption in member countries, so as to improve level of
           nutrition of people; also publishes periodic estimates of food available and has panels, which
           set international recommended dietary allowances.
Food guide A guide to help to individuals to select food so as to meet their nutritional needs.
Food poisoning A general term applied to all stomach and intestinal disturbances due to food
           contaminated with certain microorganisms or their toxins.
Fortification Addition of one or more nutrients to a food to made it richer than the unprocessed food,
           e.g., Vitamin C added to fruit juice.
Free Fatty Acids (FFA) Fatty acids obtained by the breakdown of fat under adverse conditions. Thus
           measurement of FFA is an index of fat quality.
Galactosemia Inherited error in metabolism that prevents normal metabolism of galactose.
Gastro-instestinal Part of the digestive system made up of the stomach and intestines.
Gel Technically, a colloidal solution of a solid in a liquid.
Appendices                                                                                           389


Gelatinsation Swelling and increase in viscosity of the starch molecule due to absorption of water on
           heating. Each type of starch such as rice, maize, wheat has its own gelatinsation temperature.
           This varies between 60°C to 80°C.
Glomerulonephritis Inflammation of the capillaries in glomerulli of the kidneys.
Glomerulus Filtering unit of the kidneys.
Glossitis Inflammation of the tongue.
Glyceride Compound (ester) formed by the combination of the glycerol and a fatty acid.
Glycerol A trihydroxy alcohol formed by the hydrolysis of fats.
Glycogen Chief storage form of carbohydrates in humans and animals. Found mainly in liver and
           muscles.
Gram Metric unit of weight equal to a 1000 milligrammes.
Growth Generally denotes increase in the physical size of the human body as a whole, or any of its
           dimensions, part of tissues. This begin at conception and continues up to adulthood.
Health State of complete physical, mental and social well-being and not just absence of disease or
           infirmity.
Haemo Non-protein segment portion of haemoglobin which contains iron.
Hemicellulose Indigestible polysaccharide which forms the cell wall of plants.
Haemoglobin An Iron-containing protein in the blood which carries oxygen from the lungs to the
           tissues.
Hepatitis Inflammation of liver.
Homeostasis State of physical balance, stable condition.
Hormone Substances produced in the body (chiefly by the endocrine glands), which is carried by the
           blood stream, and has a specific effect on the other cells, tissues and organs.
Host Plant or animal harbouring another organism as a parasite (or an infectious agent).
Human immunodeficiency virus (HIV) a virus which destroys body’s immune system.
Hydrochloric acid A normal constituent of human gastric juice.
Hydrolysis Splitting up of a compound into smaller units due to uptake of water.
Hypermetabolic state A state of accelerated metabolic activity.
Hypertension Higher than normal blood pressure.
Hypervitaminosis Undesirable efects produced by taking an excess of a concentrate or pure fat
           soluble vitamin.
Hypochromic Condition in which there is an abnormal decrease in the haemoglobin content of the
           erythrocytes (red blood cells) found in the blood.
Hypoglycemia Subnormal level of blood sugar, accompanied by a feeling of weakness, giddiness and
           fainting, if not attended to promptly by feeding sugar in some form.
Hypoproteinemea Abnormally small amounts of total proteins in the circulating blood plasma.
Hypothyroidism Condition in which thyroid gland secrets too little thyroxine resulting in slower than
           normal metabolic rate.
Incidence The frequency of occurrence of a situation or of a condition like disease.
390                                                   Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Insensible persipiration Persipiration that evaporates before it can be felt as a fluid on the skin.
Insulin Hormone produced by the pancreas, essential for proper metabolism of glucose.
International Unit (I.U.) Units of measure used for vitamin A activity and Vitamin D.
          I.I.U. of Vitamin A = 0.3 mcg. retinol = 0.6 mcg. beta-carotene.
          I.I.U. of Vitam in D = 0.25 mcg. of Vitam in D 3
Intolerance Senstivity or allergy to certain foods.
Intrinsic Factor (I.F.) Mucoprotein secreted by the stomach walls which is required for the absorption
           of Vit. B12. A lack of this factor leads to pernicious anaemia.
Iodised salt Table salt to which potassium or sodium iodine and a small amount of magnesium carbonate
           is added.
Ischemic heart disease Lack of blood supply to the heart muscle resulting in a heart attack.
Isotonicity Solutions having the same osmotic pressure and isotonic and this condition is called
           isotonicity.
Jaundice Yellow colour of skin and eyes due to deposition of bile pigment, indicating liver disease.
Jejunum The middle section comprising about two-fifths of the small intestine.
Ketonuria Ketone bodies in the urine.
Ketosis Accumulation of large quantities of ketone bodies (substances synthesised by the liver in the
           process of combustion of fats) in the body tissues or fluids. This results from the incomplete
           oxidation of fatty acids by the liver.
Kilocalorie Unit of heat used in nutrition. The amount of heat required to raise the temperature of 1 kg
           of water from 15 to 16°C.
Kilogram Metric unit of weight equivalent to a 1000 gram or 2.2 pounds.
Lactic acid 3 carbon acid produced in milk by bacerial fermentation of the milk sugar lactose. Also
           formed in the body during the anaerobic metabolism of carbohydrates.
Lactose Carbohydrate found in milk, milk sugar; disaccharide composed of glucose and galactose.
Lecithin A phospholipid which occurs in nervous tissues. Also found in egg yolk. It is an effective
           emulsifier.
Legume Pod or fruit of peas and beans.
Lethargy State of prolonged unconsciousness from which a person can be aroused but into which he
           immediately relapses.
Linoleic acid An 18–carbon unsaturated fatty acid which occurs widely in plant glycerides and is an
           essential fatty acid needed for maintaining growth and skin health.
Lipids Term for fats including neutral fats, oil, fatty acids, phospholipids and cholesterol.
Lymph Fluid circulating within the lymphatic system. Eventually added to venous blood circulation.
           Arises from tissue fluid. Colourless, odourless and slightly alkaline in nature.
Macrocyte An abnormally large red blood cell.
Malnutrition An all-exclusive term for poor nourishment. May result from an inadequate or excessive
           intake of one or more nutrients or of some defect in metabolism, which prevents the body
           from using the nutrients properly.
Appendices                                                                                          391


          Inadequacy in the quality of diet or insufficient intake of one or more nutrients; may also
          refer to excessive intake.
Maturation The process of coming to full development, maturity or adulthood.
Mcg. Microgramme.
Metastasize Spread of cancer cells from one organ to another.
Micro Prefix meaning small.
Micro-organisms Very small living beings.
          Bacteria, yeast and Fungi are the common microorganisms found in foods.
Millet Small grain of Indian cereal, edible seeds of grass family which are small in size.
Monovalent Having a valence of one, e.g., the valence of the hydrogen atom is one.
Mucous membrane A membrane lining the cavities and canals of the body that have contact with the
          air. It is kept moist by mucous secreted by special cells and glands. The eyes, ears, nose,
          throat, lungs, digestive tract, genitourinary and reproductive tracts are lined with mucous
          membranes.
Mutations Permanent transmissible changes in genes.
Myocardial infarction Heart attack caused by the blockage of an artery leading to the heart.
NIN National Institute of Nutrition.
Neoplasm Abnormal uncontrolled cell growth of new tissue, which leads to developing mass called
          tumor of neoplasm.
Nephritis Inflammatory disease of the kidney.
Nephron Functional unit of the kidney containing a glomerulus.
Neuropathy Nerve damage.
Nourish To provide food or other substances necessary for life and growth.
Nucleus Part of the cell that contains the chromosomes. It is the control centre of the cell for both
          chemical reactions and reproduction. It contains large quantities of DNA.
Nutrient A substance essential for the growth, maintenance, function, and reproduction of a cell or
          organism.
Nutrient deficiency or imbalance Reduces production or maturation of T-cells or B-cells, depresses
          DNA synthesis, cell division or replication and thus decreases immunity.
Nutritional status Health of a person as influenced by the quality of foods eaten and the ability of body
          to utilise these food to meet its needs.
Organic Acid Contains one or more carboxyl groups (COOH). Simple examples are formic (HCOOH)
          and acetic acid (CH3COOH).
Organic Kingdom The animal and vegetable kingdoms.
Osmosis Transfer of solvent through a semi-permeable membrane to equalise solute concentration on
          either side of the membrane. The walls of living cells are semi-permeable membranes, and
          much of the activity of the cell depends on osmosis.
Osmotic pressure The pressure that causes water or any other solvent to move from a solution with
          low concentration of solute to one having high concentration of solute.
392                                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Osteoporosis A disease of bone characterised by increased porosity of bones.
Oxidation The change in an atom, atoms or a molecule, which involve: (1) gain of oxygen, (2)
           Removal of hydrogen, or (3) loss of electrons.
Palatibility The equality characteristics (such as colour, flavour and texture) of a food product that
           make an impression on the organs of touch, taste, smell or sight and have significance in
           determining the acceptability of the food product to the user.
Parasite Animal or plant deriving nourishment from another living organism: self-interested hanger-on.
Parenteral nutrition Nutrition provided via a vein; it does not use the gastrointestinal tract.
Pathogenic Capable of producing disease.
Pectin A soluble polysaccharide (found in many fruits), which can form a gel in the presence of
           adequate sugar and acid. It is unaffected by animal enzymes.
Pepsin Protein splitting enzyme found in the gastric juice of the stomach.
Peristalsis Rhythmic wavelike movement caused by the muscles of the small intestine to move food
           forward; moves the chyme along.
pH Negative logarithm of hydrogen ion concentration, which express the acidity or alkalinity of a
           substance.
Phenylketonuria (PKU) An inborn error of metabolism in which the infant lacks are enzyme needed
           to metabolize phenylalamine, an essential amino acid.
Phospholipids Fat-like substances consisting of glycerol, 2 fatty acids, a phoophate group and a
           nitrogeneous base, e.g., lecithin.
Photophobia Means fear or hatred of light, a condition resulting from lack of riboflavin, characterised
           by rough eyelids and senstivity of eyes to bright sunlight.
Photosynthesis The process by which the chlorophyll presents in the plant converts water and
           carbondioxide into carbohydrates using sunlight as an energy source.
Phytate Salt of phytic acid (a phosporous containing compound found in the outer layers of cereals).
           Phytates of Ca, Mg, are insoluble and hence cannot be absorbed by the small intestine.
           Hence phytic acid interferes with normal calcium absorption.
Placenta Connecting tube between the wall of the uterus and the foetus—through which the foetus is
           nourished.
Plasma Fluid portion of blood in which formed cells (white blood cells, red blood cells, platelets) are
           suspended.
Polluted containing fecal matter, (the presence of coliform bacteria is an indication of possible fecal
           contamination).
Polyneuritis Inflammation of a number or peripheral nerves.
Polyunsaturated fatty acid (PUFA) Fatty acids containing 2 or more double bonds, e.g., linoleic,
           linolenic, and arachidonic acids.
Potential energy Energy in chemical form, which may be released either as heat or muscular work
           when the substance is oxidised.
Precursor A compound that can be used by the body to form an essential nutrient.
Proteolytic Capable of splitting or digesting protein into simpler compounds.
Appendices                                                                                        393

Radiation Is the emission of alpha, beta particles or electrons or gamma rays.
RDI Recommended dietary intake for nutrients.
Red Blood Cells (RBC) Also known as erythrocytes, contain pigment haemoglobin, which is red.
Reduction A chemical process involving removal of oxygen, the addition of hydrogen or in general
          gain of electrons.
Renal stone Kidney stone.
Rennin A gastric enzyme which coagulates milk.
Respiration The exchange of O2 and CO2 in the lungs, between the cell and its environment, which
          ultimately releases energy.
Retinol Equivalent (R.E.) A unit used to express vitamin a activity; 1 R.E = 3.33 I.U.
Retinopathy Damage to small blood vessels in the eye.
Rickets A deficiency disease caused by absence of vitamin D or calcium or both which affects the
          skeletal system.
Salmonella Genus of bacteria causing intestinal infection. Frequently contaminates foods. Is destroyed
          by heating.
Sanitary Pertaining to cleanliness.
Scurvy A deficiency disease due to the lack of vitamin C. Symptoms are bleeding gums, weakenss and
          loss of weight.
Semi-permeale membrane A membrane which is permeable to certain solids only and is freely
          permeable to water.
Serum The fluid part of blood, which separates from the blood cells after clotting.
Short chain fatty acids Those with 10 or fewer carbon atoms in one molecule.
Simple sugars Are the monasaccharide—glucose, fructose and galactose.
Stearic acid A saturated fatty acid made up of 18 carbon atoms.
Sterol An alcohol of high molecular weight, e.g., cholesterol, ergosterol, etc.
Subclinical deficiency An inadequate intake of a nutrient leading to a deficiency, which cannot be
          detected by a clinical test.
Syndrome A medical term meaning a group of symptoms occurring together.
Synthesis A coming together of two or more substances to form a more complex one.
Systolic pressure Blood pressure taken as the heart contracts.
Thyroxine Hormone produced by the thyroid gland containing iodine (regulates energy metabolism).
Tissue A collection of cells forming a structure.
Toxin A poisonous substance elaborated by certain organisms, e.g., bacterial toxins.
Triglyceride An ester of glycerol and three fatty acids.
Trypsin An enzyme secreted by the pancreas, which splits protein.
Tyramine A vasoactive amine found in decayed animal tissue, ripe cheese and other foods.
Urea The final product of the deamination of amino acids, chief waste product of protein metabolism.
Virus A minute microscopic highly infectious organism, characterized by total dependence on living
          cells for its reproduction and metabolism.
394                                                 Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Viscosity Measures of fluidity of a liquid.
Vitamin Organic compounds occurring in minute amounts in foods and essentials for numerous
          metabolic reactions.
WHO World Health Organisation of the United Nations. The specialised agency started in 1948, located
          in Geneva, that is concerned with health on an international level.
Xerosis Abnormal dryness on skin and eye.
Yeast Microorganism responsible for fermentation of sugars. Convert sugar into alcohol and carbon
          dioxide anaerobically.
                              Further Reading

I. Nutrition and Diet Therapy
     1. Antia, F.P.: Clinical Dietetics and Nutrition, 3rd ed., Oxford University Press, Bombay,
        1986.
     2. Briggs, George M. and Doris H. Calloway: Nutrition and Physical Fitness, 11th ed. Harcourt
        College Publishers, New York, USA, 1984.
     3. Cataldo, Corinne B., Whitney, Eleanor N. and Linda Kelly DeBruyne: Nutrition and Diet
        Therapy – Principles and Practice, West Publishing Co. St. Paul, 2003
     4. Chaney, Margaret S., Margaret L. Ross and Jelia C. Witchi: Nutrition 9th ed. Houghton.
        Mifflin, Boston 1979 (Indian reprint, Surjeet Publications, New Delhi, 1979).
     5. Davidson, S.R., Passmore and J.F. Brock.: Human Nutrition & Dietetics, 8th ed. Churchill
        Livingstone, London, U.K., 1986.
     6. Fleck, Henrietta: Introduction to Nutrition: 4th ed., Macmillan, New York, 1981.
     7. Garrow J.S.S., W.P.T. James and A. Ralph: Human Nutrition & Dietetics, 10th ed. W.B.
        Saunders, Philadelphia, USA, 1999.
     8. Joshi, Shubangini A.: Nutrition and Dietetics, Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, India, 1992.
     9. Leverton Ruth, M. Food Becomes You: Better Health through Better Nutrition, Doubleday
        Publishing, Boston, USA, 1980.
    10. Lutz, Carroll A. and Karen R. Przytuski: Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 4th ed. Davis F.A.,
        Philadelphia, USA, 1995
    11. Martin, Ethel A. and Ardath A. Coolidge: Nutrition in Action 4th ed., Holt Rinehart and
        Winston, New York, 1978.
    12. McDivitt, Maxine E. and Sumati R. Mudambi: Human Nutrition – Principles and
        Applications in India, Revised Edition, Prentice Hall, New Delhi, 1973.
    13. Patwardhan, V.N. : Nutrition in India 2nd ed. Indian Journal of Medical Sciences, New
        Delhi, 1961.
    14. Robinson, Corinne, H., Marilyn R. Lawler, Wanda L. Chanoweth & Anne E. Garwick:
        Normal and Therapeutic Nutrition, 17th ed. Macmillan Publishing Co. New York, USA,
        1996.
    15. Shils, Moshe S, Benjamin Caballero, A., Catherine Ross and Robert J. Cousins: Modern
        Nutrition in Health and Disease, 10th ed. Lippincott, Williams & Wilkins, Baltimore, USA.,
        2005.
    16. Swaminathan M.: Essentials of Food and Nutrition, Volume I and II, 2nd ed. Ganesh,
        Madras, India, 1985.
396                                                Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

      17. Townsend, Carolyn E. & Roth, Ruth A.: Nutrition and Diet Therapy 8th ed., Delmar
          Publishers, Albany, USA., 2003.
      18. Wardlaw, G.M., and P.M. Insel: Perspectives in Nutrition, 2nd ed., Mosby Year Book Inc.,
          St. Louis, USA., 1996.
      19. Williams, Sue R. Basic Nutrition and Diet Therapy, 1st ed. Elsevier Science, New York,
          1999.

II. Food Science, Food Hygiene & Microbiology
       1. Bennion, Marian and Osee Hughes: Introductory Foods, 8th ed. Macmillan, New York,
          1985.
       2. Frazier, W.C.: Food Microbiology: 2nd ed., Tata McGraw Hill, New Delhi, 1974.
       3. Health Hazards of the Human Environment, WHO, 1973.
       4. Kawata, K.: Environmental Sanitation in India, Lucknow Publishing House, India, 1963.
       5. Lowe, Belle: Experimental Cookery: 4th ed., Wiley, New York, 1955.
       6. Meyer, Lillian: Food Chemistry, Reinhold, New York, 1978.
       7. Mudambi Sumati R., Shalini M. Rao and M.V. Rajagopal Food Science, 2nd ed. New Age
          International, New Delhi, 2005
       8. Peckman, Gladys C. and Jeanne H. Freeland-Graves: Foundations of Food Preparation,
          5th ed., Macmillan, New York, 1987.
       9. Potter, N.N. and G.G. Birch: Food Science, Westport, Conn., USA, 1986.

III. Publications of The Indian Council of Medical Research
       1. Banerjee, S.: Studies in Energy Metabolism, Indian Council of Medical Research Special
          Report Series no. 43, 1962.
       2. Gopalan, C.B.V. Ramashastri and S.C. Balasubramaniam, Revised and updated by B.S.
          Narasinga Rao, Y.G. Deosthale and K.C. Pant: Nutritive Value of Indian Foods, National
          Institute of Nutrition, Hyderabad, India, 2000.
       3. Manual of Standards of Drinking Water Supplies, 2nd ed. Indian Council of Medical
          Research, Special Report Series No. 44, New Delhi, 1975.
       4. Patwardhan, V.N.: Dietary Allowances for Indians–Calories and Proteins, Indian Council
          of Medical Research, New Delhi, 1960.
       5. Venkatachalam, P.S. and L.M. Rebello: Nutrition for Mother and Child, 3rd ed., Indian
          Council of Medical Research, Special Report Series, No. 41, 1978.

IV. Publications By United Nations Agencies: FAO, WHO
       1. Amino Acid Contents of Food and Biological Data on Proteins, FAO Nutritional Studies,
          No. 24, Rome, 1970.
       2. Aykroyd, W.R.: Legumes in Human Nutrition, Revised ed., FAO, Rome, 1982.
       3. Energy and Protein Requirements FAO Nutrition Meetings Report Series 62, WHO
          Tech. Report Series No. 522, Rome, 1973.
Further Reading                                                                           397

      4. Food Composition Tables for International Use, FAO Nutritional Studies No. 11, FAO,
         Rome, 1954.
      5. Nutrition and Working Efficiency FFHC Basic Study No. 5, 1962.
      6. Calcium Requiremetns WHO Tech. Report Series 230, Geneva, 1962.
      7. Control of Nutrition Anaemia with Special Reference to Iron Deficiency., Tech. Report
         Series 580, Geneva, 1975.
      8. Jelliffe, D.B.: Assessment of Nutritional Status for the Community, WHO, 1966.
      9. Requirements of Ascorbic Acid, Vitamin D, Vitamin B-12, Folate and Iron, WHO
         Tech. Report Series 452, Geneva, 1975.
     10. Vitamin A Deficiency and Xerophthalmia, Tech. Report Series 590, Geneva, 1976.
    This page
intentionally left
     blank
                                          Index

A 1600 calorie low fat diet (vegetarian) 308   Alkalosis 134
A milk-based formula 272                       Allergies 333
A precursor of 52                              Allergy 333
A sample menu– foods included in 80-100g       Alpha-tocopherol 96
     protein diet 278                          American Diabetes Association 9
Abnormal formation of red blood cells 108      Amino acids 23, 357, 59
Accidental injury 346                          Amla 166
Acetyl coenzyme 21                             Amniotic fluid cells 337
Acid-base balance 132, 134                     Amphoteric 59
Acidity 281                                    Amphoteric nature of proteins 61
Acidosis 40, 134, 299                          Anabolism 12
Acid producing foods 134                       Anaemia 149, 155
Acids, bases, pH 13                            Anal canal 281
Acquired immuno-deficiency syndrome (AIDS).    Angina pectoris 301, 312
     332                                       Angular stomatitis 105
Activity of carotenoids 91                     Animal foods, milk, egg, meat and liver 47
Activity of the thyroid gland 77               Anion 132
Acute kidney failure 319                       Anion K+
Addictive behaviours 350                       Anorexia 103
Adequate, optimum and good nutrition 4         Anorexia nervosa 80, 350
Adipose tissue 53, 75                          Antacids 357
Adolescent 200                                 Anthocyanins 238
Adrenal glands 110                             Anthropometric measurements 263
Adulthood 186                                  Antibiotics 357
Advancement from HIV to AIDS 332               Antibodies 61
Aerobic capacity 138                           Anticoagulants 357
Affects the skin 107                           Anticonvulsants 357
Agar-agar 43                                   Antivitamins 357
Age 77, 139                                    Apathy 100, 109
Aiding absorption of iron 110                  Arachidonic-acid 49
Aids 141                                       Arginine 61
Alcohol 281, 296, 357                          Ascorbic acid 109, 165
Alcoholism 350, 352                            Ascorbic acid (Vitamin C) 109
Alkali producing foods 134                     Aspartame 45
400                                  Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Asthma 334                           Build resistance to infection 110
Atheroma 55                          Bulimia 350
Atherosclerosis 55, 282, 308         Bulimia nervosa 352
Atoms 13                             Burns 343, 344
Atonic constipation 283              Butter and ghee 47
Autoimmune diseases 332
                                     Caffeine 358
Baking 233                           Calciferol 94
Balanced diet 160                    Calcitriol 52, 95
Basal energy expenditure (BEE) 76    Calcium 132, 191, 192
Basal metabolic rate 192             Calcium loss 357
Basal metabolism 76                  Calcium stones 323
B-complex 191                        Caloric 73
Beaded ribs 95                       Caloric content of foods 73
Beneficial food habits 173           Calorie content of dal 72
Beri beri 103, 152                   Calorie density 74
Beta-carotene 91, 165                Cancer 325, 332
Beta-oxidation of fatty acids 23     Carbohydrate loading 141
Between meal snacks 200              Carbohydrates 7, 38, 235
Beverages 271                        Carboxyl groups 13
Bicarbonate 132                      Carcinogens 45, 325
Bile acids 52                        Cardiovascular diseases 301
Biological value (BV) 65             Cardiovascular system 100
Blood lipids 302                     Carotenoids 238
Blood pressure control 309           Carries carbon dioxide to the lungs, 130
Blood vessel walls become weak 100   Catabolism 12
BMR 76                               Catalysts such as copper 109
BMR factors 80                       Cation 13
Body composition 139                 Causes of kidney disease 315
Body mass index (BMI), 263           Cecum 281
Body size and composition 77         Cell permeability 132
Body’s immune system 61              Cell-mediated immunity 330
Boiling 232                          Cellulose 39
Bomb calorimeter 71                  Central nervous system 91
Bottle feeding 195                   Cereals 105
Bowed legs 95                        Cereals and millets 161
Brain 110                            Cerebrosides 52
Breakfast 198                        Change in consistency 258
Breast 326                           Changes 235
Breast feeding 194                   Characteristics of COPD 279
Breast milk 192, 194                 Cheilosis 105, 152
Breathing rapidly and deeply 134     Chemical score 65
Brewer’s yeast 105                   Chemotherapy 327
Broiling or grilling 234             Chemotherapy agents 357
Index                                                                                      401

Child birth 150                                  Confusion and fear 103
Chloride 132                                     Congestive heart failure 312
Choice of fuel 230                               Conjugated proteins 60
Cholesterol 47, 52                               Conserve body heat 53
Cholesterol esterase 54                          Constipation 44,100, 103, 190, 283
Chondroitin sulfate 40                           Constituent 130
Chronic ailments 47                              Control of insects and rodents 252
Chronic alcoholism 103                           Control of Type I Diabetes 298
Chronic Glomerulonephritis 317                   Control of Type II Diabetes 298
Chronic Obstructive Pulmonary Disease (COPD)     Cornea 147
      279                                        Coronary occlusion 302
Chronic Renal Failure 320                        Coronary thrombosis 302
Chylomicrons 18, 53                              Corticosteroids 52
Chyme 16                                         Coumarin 357
Cicely Williams 145                              Cramping, diarrhoea 45
Cilia 330                                        Cream in the milk and dahi 49
Circulation 47                                   Creatine phosphate 61
Cirrhosis 289                                    Creatinine 61, 64
Cis form 50                                      Cretinism 154, 155
Citric acid cycle 21                             Cretins 155
Clear fluid diet 260                             Crystalline 109
Clear-liquid diet 265                            Cyanocobalamin 109
Climate 78                                       Cystic fibrosis 292
Clinical assessment 263                          Cytoplasm 12
Clinical problems 42
Cobalt 109                                       Daily diet for a one year old 197
Coefficients of digestibility 72                 Dark adaptation 90, 94
Coenzyme 15                                      Deamination 23, 24
Co-enzymes NAD 105                               Deep fat frying 233
Cofactors 15                                     Deficiency 105, 107, 108, 109, 112, 133
Colon 281, 326                                   Deficiency of proteins 67
Colon cancer 45                                  Deficiency of vitamin K 96
Colostrum 194                                    Definition 88
Colour in food 241                               Degradation 14
Coma 299                                         Dehydration 40, 131, 138
Combination of these methods 327                 Delayed elimination of wastes 131
Comparative cost of energy-supplying foods 179   Dementia 107, 153
Comparative cost of protein foods 180            Density of lipoproteins 53
Comparative cost of vitamin A foods 180          Dental caries 42
Comparative cost of vitamin C foods 181          Deoxyribonucleic acid (DNA) 13
Complement system 330                            Depletion and repletion studies 28
Complications 344, 353                           Depression 107
Composition 272                                  Derived proteins 60
Composition of solutions 273                     Dermatitis 152
402                                                 Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Destroyed by the action of heat 109                 Effect of deficiency 95, 107
Diabetes is not controlled 134                      Effects of alcohol intake on nutrition 354
Diabetes mellitus 261, 293                          Effects of insufficient energy supply 83
Diabetics 44                                        Electrolytes 132, 138
Dialysis 323                                        Electron 13
Diarrhoea 146, 152, 283                             Elements 13
Died of scurvy 109                                  Elevated blood cholesterol levels 52
Diet 5, 161, 276, 283, 289, 290, 291, 344, 353      Elevation of body temperature 131
Diet during 17–21 years 200                         Emotional 343
Diet for a patient with chronic renal failure 321   Empty calories 200
Diet for Bulemics 352                               Emulsifying agents 52
Diet for one year old child 197                     Endocrine disorders 341
Diet modification 317                               Endoplasmic reticulum 13
Diet modifications 292, 318                         Energy 71
Diet plan 296                                       Energy acceptor (ATP) 13
Diet therapy 261, 280, 291, 292, 309, 317, 323      Energy balance 91
Dietary assessment 263                              Energy expenditure 76
Dietary counselling 263                             Energy for growth and repair 80
Dietary fibre 40, 42                                Energy for utilisation of food 78
Dietary fibres 42                                   Energy intake 74
Dietary intakes 27                                  Energy needed 139
Dietary management 147                              Energy needs 189
Dietary modifications 324, 348                      Energy requirement of reference indian 81
Dietary needs of the nursing mother 190             Energy storage in the body 75
Digestion 14                                        Energy supply 61
Diglycerides 51                                     Enlarged joints 95
Dilate 100                                          Enterokinase 17
Direct calorimetry 76                               Epinephrine 42, 61
Diseases of the gall bladder 291                    Equal and nutrasweet 45
Diseases of the pancreas 291                        Equipment 251
Disturbances in acid-base balance 134               Ergogenic 141
Diuretics for weight reduction 133                  Ergogenic aids 141
Diverticulosis 44                                   Ergosterol 52
Dizziness 107                                       Esophagus 281, 326
Drug 356                                            Essential amino acids 64, 65
Drug absorption 356                                 Essential component of several coenzymes 109
Dry beri-beri 152                                   Essential fatty acids 50, 96, 167
Dumping syndrome 348                                Essential Fatty Acids (EFA) 53
Duodenum 16, 281                                    Ester formation 14
Duration 139                                        Estrogens 52
                                                    Evolution of the vegetarian dietary pattern 206
Edema 321                                           Excess energy intake 85
Edible portion 8, 169                               Exchange 10
Effect of alcohol intake 353                        Exchange lists 10
Index                                                                                          403

Exchange lists 296                                Fluids and Oxygen 138
Excrete large amounts of ketones 134              Fluorescent pigment containing the sugar ‘ribose’
Excrete soluble waste 130                               103
Exercise 298                                      Folate antagonists 357
Exercise for physical fitness 137                 Folate deficiency 357
Exercise programme 138                            Folic acid 108, 150
Extracellular fluid 130, 132                      Folium 108
Extra-long-chain fatty acids 50                   Food 4, 250
                                                  Food List for a 1000 mg Sodium Diet 311
Factorial method 28                               Food and Agriculture Organisation (FAO) 9
Factors affecting digestion 19                    Food acceptance in illness 262
Factors affecting the BMR 77                      Food allowances for high calorie 278
Failure of the circulatory system 131             Food and other habits of senior citizens 202
Fallacies about foods and nutrition 173           Food budget 172
Family Planning Department of the Government of   Food components 235
      India 148                                   Food composition 8
Family size and composition 183                   Food contamination 251
FAO 27, 80                                        Food cost 169, 179
Fat 73                                            Food energy intake 75
Fat set-point 140                                 Food habits and the elderly 203
Fatigue 100                                       Food handling 250
Fats 7                                            Food misinformation 182
Fat-soluble 88                                    Food needs of the school child — 6–12 years old
Fat-soluble antioxidant 96                              198
Fat-soluble vitamins A, D, E & K 53               Food plan for a day 188
Fat-soluble vitamins 47                           Food preparation techniques 229
Fatty acids 50                                    Food sanitation 250
Fear 107, 276                                     Food selection 186
Fever 78, 276                                     Food selection and purchase 213
Fever to help recovery 110                        Food selection guide 305
Fibre 17, 42, 295                                 Food sources 101, 103
Fibre content of common foods (per serving) 295   Food sources of protein 62
Fibrous 59                                        Food tolerance 285
Fibrous proteins 59                               Foods 182
First degree 344                                  Foods allowed and avoided in low residue diet
Flavin mononucleotide (FMN) 103                         285
Flavin-adenine dinucleotide (FAD) 103             Foods bland in flavour 258
Flavonoids 238                                    Foods given to children 172
Flavour 271                                       Forgetfulness 103, 107
Flavour components 239                            Formation of prothrombin 96
Flavour in food 243                               Formula feed 272
Flavouring substances 244                         Fortified salt 155
Fluid therapy 345                                 Fourth degree 344
Fluids 138                                        Full fluid diet 259, 266
404                                               Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Function in vision 90                             Guavas and cashew apples 110
Functions 60, 89, 94, 100, 103, 107, 108, 109
Functions of kidneys 315                          Haeme compounds 109
Functions of liver 287                            Haemoglobin 59, 61, 149
                                                  Haemoglobin synthesis 110
Galactolipid 40                                   Haemopoesis 91
Galactose 39                                      Haemorrhages 112, 150
Galactosemia 336, 339                             Haemorrhages result 112
Gall bladder 54                                   Haemorrhoids 44
Gap junctional communication 91                   Harris-Benedict equation 264
Gastrectomy 347                                   HDL 60
Gastrointestinal System 100                       Health 5
Gastrointestinal tract 43, 107, 281               Health food 174
General weakness 112                              Health hazard 47
Genes 336                                         Health of epithelial tissues 90
Genetic predisposition 326                        Heart muscle weakens 100
Gestational diabetes 294                          Hepatic failure 290
Globular proteins 59                              Hepatitis 289
Glomerular Filtration Rate (GFR) 315              Heterozygous 336
Glomeruli 314                                     Hidden fat 47
Glomerulonephritis 317                            High blood pressure 55
Glucagon 42                                       High concentrations of vitamin C 110
Glucocorticoids 42                                High Density Lipoproteins (HDL) 53
Glucose 39                                        High protein diet 278
Glutamic acid 61                                  High protein high calorie diet 277
Glutathione reductase in erythrocytes (EGR) 103   High sodium foods/drugs to be avoided 311
Gluten 281                                        Histidine 61
Glycerol 49                                       Home care of patients 274
Glycine 61                                        Home tube feeding 273
Glycogen 75                                       Homocystinuria 336
Glycolysis 21                                     Hook-worm infestation 150
Glycoproteins 60                                  Hormonal control 78
Goal of fitness 137                               Hormones 61
Goitre 154, 155                                   Human immuno-deficiency virus 332
Good buffers 134                                  Humoral immunity 331
Good health 198                                   Hydrochloric acid 17
Government programmes 172                         Hydrogen ion concentration 13
Green 108                                         Hydrogenation 50
Groundnuts 105                                    Hydrolysis 14
Group 3(A) — Vitamin a rich green and yellow      Hygroscopic 39
     vegetables and fruits 165                    Hyperactivity 133
Growth 27, 91                                     Hyperkalemia 133, 321
Growth and repair 77                              Hyperkeratosis 94
Growth hormones 42                                Hyperlipidemia 47
Index                                                                                           405

Hypersensitivity 333                              Interstitial fluid; 130
Hypertension 301, 308, 321                        Intracellular enzymes 59
Hyperthyroidism 341                               Intracellular fluid 132, 133
Hypoglycemia 299                                  Intracellular fluids, 130
Hypothyroidism 342                                Intrinsic factor 109
                                                  Invert sugar 39
Iatrogenic 264                                    Invisible fat 49
ICMR Advisory Committee (RDI, 1991) 168           Iodine 190, 191
ICMR expert committee 80                          Iodine deficiency 154
IDD 155                                           Iodine deficiency disorders 154
IDDM 294                                          Ion 13
Ileum 16                                          Iron 150, 190, 191, 193
Immune response 91                                Iron deficiency anaemia 149
Immune system disorders 332                       Iron fortified salt 150
Immunity 275                                      Iron supplements 150
Immunodeficiency virus (HIV) 332                  Irreversible degeneration of the central nervous
Immunoglobulin production 91                            system 109
Immunopolysaccharides 40                          Irritability 100, 103, 107
Important functions 17                            Ischemic heart disease 301
Important nutritional aspects of our dietary      Isomaltase 16
     pattern 208                                  Isomers 50
Inability of new RBCs to develop normally         Isoniazid 357
     resulting in megaloblastic anaemia 109
                                                  Isotopes 13
Inadequate fiber 281
                                                  IUNS (International Union of Nutritional Sciences)
Increase or decrease energy content 258                 27
Increase or decrease fibre 258
Increase or decrease other nutrients 258          Jaundice 289
Increases metabolism 78                           Jejunum 16
Indian Council of Agricultural Research 9         Joule (J) 71
Indian Council of Medical Research 192            Jowar 153
Indian Council of Medical Research (ICMR) 9, 26
Indigestion 100                                   Keratinised 90
Indirect calorimetry 76                           Keratomalacia 94
Infants 192                                       Ketonuria 299
Infections 110                                    Kidney 110
Inhibit carcinogenesis 91                         Kidney diseases 314
Insensible perspiration 130                       Kidney stones 323
Insomnia 107                                      Kidney transplant 323
Insufficient energy supply 82                     Kilocalorie 71
Insulation 47                                     Krebs cycle 21
Insulin 42, 44, 298                               Kwashiorkor 68, 145, 146
Intensity 139
                                                  Labile nutrient 110
Interaction between diet and drugs 355
                                                  Laboratory assessment 263
Interactions of frequently used drugs with
                                                  Lack of appetite 112
     nutrients 359
406                                               Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Lack of riboflavin affects the eyes 105           Lunch 199
Lactase 16, 39, 41                                Lysosomes 13
Lactobacilli 40
Lactose 39, 41, 281                               Magnesium 132
Lactose-free formulas 272                         Maintain body composition 131
Large intestine 20, 281                           Maintenance of body weight 84
Latent stage 67                                   Malaria 357
Law of Conservation of Energy 76                  Malfunctioning of the renal 131
LDL 60                                            Malnutrition 5, 143, 264
Leaf 108                                          Maltase 16, 41
Leafy plants 108                                  Maltose 39
League of nations 26                              MAOI (Monamine Oxidase Inhibitors) 358
Lean body mass (LBM) 77                           Maple syrup urine disease (MSUD) 336, 339
Lecithin 52                                       Marasmus 145, 146
Lecithinase 54                                    Meal distribution 296
Leukemia 357                                      Meal planning 176
Levadopa 357                                      Meal planning and food exchange lists 303
Ligands 91                                        Meal planning for school children and
                                                      adolescents 198
Limitations of RDAs 32
Linoleic 49, 51                                   Measurement of energy expenditure 76
Linoleic acid 326                                 Measurement of food energy 71
Linoleic acid (Omega-6 PUFA) 53                   Measurement of protein quality 65
                                                  Mechanically soft diet 268
Linoleic and linolenic acids 96
                                                  Medium chain 50
Linolenic 49
                                                  Medium of food preparation 231
Linolenic acid (Omega-3 PUFA) 53
                                                  Megaloblastic anaemia 108, 109
Lipid disorders 53
                                                  Mennonite population 336
Lipids 295
Lipids 47, 60                                     Menstruation 150
Lipoproteins 47, 49, 53                           Mental 109
Lipoproteins (proteins + lipids) 60               Mental depression 103
                                                  Mental stress 343
Lipos 47
                                                  Metabolic disorders 336
Liquid diets 259, 265
                                                  Metabolic disorders involving amino acids 337
Liquid foods 131
                                                  Metabolic water 130
Liver 105, 110, 287
Long chain fatty acids 50                         Metabolically active tissues 110
Loss more than 10 per cent of fluid 131           Metabolism 11
Loss of appetite (anorexia) 103                   Metalloproteins 60
                                                  Metastasize 325
Loss of weight 109
                                                  Methionine 61
Low density lipoproteins (LDL) 53
                                                  Methotrexate (MRX) 357
Low fat diet – vegetarian 307
                                                  Micelles 18
Low residue diet 284
                                                  Midarm circumference (MC) 263
Low sodium sources of vegetables and fruits 310
Lubricant 47, 130                                 Mild restriction 310
Index                                                                                            407

Milk 282                                         Nephrotic syndrome 318
Milk formation 61                                Nervous abnormalities 109
Milk secretion 192                               Nervous system 100, 107
Milk, eggs, fish and meat 101                    Net protein utilisation (NPU) 65
Mineral 190                                      Neuropathy 299
Minerals 7                                       Neutron 13
Mitochondria 13                                  New tissues are formed 52
Mode of feeding 344                              Niacin equivalents 102, 105
Moderate restriction 310                         Nicotinamide 105
Moderation 326                                   Nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide 105
Modifications of normal diet 258, 265            Nicotinic acid 105
Modify intervals of feeding 258                  NIDDM 294
Moisture 73                                      Night blindness 90
Molecule 13                                      Nitrites 326
Monitoring control 298                           Nitrogen balance studies 66
Monoglyceride 51                                 Nitrogen cycle 59
Monosaccharide 38                                Non-essential amino acids 64, 65
Monosaccharides 16                               Non-obese 47
Monounsaturated fatty acids (MUFA) 51            Non-perishable foods 214
Moodinesss 103                                   Non-specific immunity 329
Mortality rate 194                               Non-vegetarian diet 207
Mouth 326                                        Normal diet 257
MSUD 336                                         Normal hospital diet 265
Mucoproteins 60                                  Nucleoproteins 60
Mucus 330                                        Nucleus 12
MUFA 51, 326                                     Nutrient absorption 356
Muscle contraction 132                           Nutrient balance 27
Muscle mass 75, 139                              Nutrient content 271
Muscle weakens 100                               Nutrient density 10, 168
Mutations of genes 336                           Nutrient ratios 140
Mycobacterium tuberculosis 277                   Nutrient requirements 192
Myocardial infarction 301, 312                   Nutrient reserves 139
                                                 Nutrient turnover 28
NADP 105                                         Nutrients needed 346
Naso-labial dyssebacia 105                       Nutrients to the cells 130
National nutrition monitoring bureau (NNMB) 54   Nutrition 4
Natural food 174                                 Nutrition during infancy 192
Nature of vitamins 88                            Nutrition during performance 141
Nausea 103                                       Nutrition during pregnancy and lactation 188
Need cholesterol 52                              Nutrition education 172
Neoplasia 325                                    Nutrition for middle age adults (40 – 60 yrs.) 201
Neoplasm 325                                     Nutrition for senior citizen (60 + years) 201
Nephron 314                                      Nutrition in HIV infection 333
Nephropathy 300                                  Nutrition plan 294
408                                              Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Nutrition support 339                            Oxidation-reduction 14
Nutrition therapy 351                            Oxygen 138
Nutritional adequacy 177                         Oxygen and catalysts such as copper 109
Nutritional adequacy of Indian diets 207
Nutritional assessment 344                       Palmitic 51
Nutritional care 295, 346                        Pancreas 110, 326
Nutritional care 5                               Pancreatic amylase 16
Nutritional care of cancer patient 328           Pancreatic insufficiency 291
Nutritional care of patient with burns 345       Pancreatic lipase 54
Nutritional considerations 347                   Pan-frying 233
Nutritional deficiency and immune function 331   Parboiling 152
Nutritional marasmus 68                          Parenteral nutrition 273
Nutritional status 5                             Part of the cementing material 109
Nuts 47, 49                                      Pathogen 275
                                                 Pectins 39
Obesity 42, 47                                   Pellagra 107, 152
Objectives in meal planning 177                  Pellagra-preventing factor 105
Obligatory loss of nutrients 28                  Penicillin 357
Odourless compound 109                           Peptide bond 59
Oedema 132                                       Perishable foods 217
Oils and fats 167, 237                           Peristalitic 43
Oilseeds 47                                      Pernicious anaemia factor 109
Oleic 51                                         Ph 13, 134
Omega end 51                                     Phagocytes 330
Omega-3-fatty acids 51, 54, 326                  Pharynx 326
Omega-6-fatty acid 51                            Phenyl ketonuria (PKU) 338
Omega-9-fatty acid 51                            Phenylalanine 61
Oncologist 325                                   Phenylketonuria 45
Oncology 325                                     Phosphate 132
Oral hypoglycemic agents (OHA) 298               Phospholipids 47, 49, 52
Oral rehydration solution (ORS) 284              Phosphoproteins 60
Organic acids 132                                Phosphorus 109, 191, 192
Organic foods 174                                Phosphorylation 14
Organic solvents 47                              Photophobia 105, 152
Osmolality 272                                   Photosynthesis 38, 91
Osmotic pressure 61, 132                         Phylloquinone 96
Osteomalacia 95                                  Physical activity 56
Osteoporosis (bone loss) 95                      Physical fitness movement 137
Other liver diseases 290                         Physiological fuel value 72
Other vegetables and fruits 166                  Phytate content 149
Overdosage 94, 96                                PKU 336
Overnutrition 5                                  Plant pigments 238
Overweight 47                                    Plasma cholesterol 55
Oxidants and antioxidants 239                    Plasma triglycerides (TRG) 56
Index                                                                                           409

Poly 38                                              Provitamin A 91
Polydipsia 294                                       Psychological functions of food 7
Polysaccharides 38                                   Pteroyl-mono-glutamic acid 108
Poly-unsaturated fatty acids (PUFA) 49, 51, 96       Ptyalin (salivary amylase) 15, 41
Poor absorption of food 131                          PUFA 51
Poor appetite, 100                                   Pulses and meat 105
Poorly toned muscles 103                             Pulses, nuts, oilseeds 101
Poor stomach function 100                            Pureed diets 268
Possible meal plan for protein controlled diet 322   Pyridoxal 107
Postoperative diet 347                               Pyridoxamine 107
Potable water 247                                    Pyridoxine 107, 357
Potassium 132, 133                                   Pyrimethamine 357
Practical aspects of food selection 168
Precontest/pregame meal 141                          Radiation 327
Precursor of niacin 105                              Radioactive 13
Precursors of eicosanoids 53                         Rationed foodgrains 172
Precursors of enzymes 61                             Reasons for cooking foods 227
Preliminary treatment of food 228                    Recommended daily allowance 103
Pressure cooking 233                                 Recommended Dietary Allowance (RDA) 26, 81,
Principles of diet therapy 345                            107, 139
Prolongs clotting time 96                            Recommended dietary allowances for Indians 30
Properties of plant pigments 238                     Recommended dietary allowances of vitamin A
                                                          (mcg/d) 93
Prostaglandins 53, 54
                                                     Recommended Dietary Intake (RDI) 27
Prostate cancer 326
                                                     Recommended dietary intake of vitamin A (mcg/
Protective epidermis 90                                   day) 93
Protective vegetables and fruits 165
                                                     Recommended dietary intakes of protein 66
Protein 192
                                                     Recovery period 345
Protein calorie malnutrition 144, 146
                                                     Rectum 281
Protein catabolism 276
                                                     Reduce salt intake 133
Protein Efficiency Ratio (PER) 65
                                                     Reference body weight 29
Protein Energy Malnutrition (PEM) 67, 144            Reference man 30
Protein foods 163                                    Reference woman 30
Protein needs 189
                                                     Regional breakfast 199
Protein quality 65
                                                     Regional menus 209
Protein rich foods 143
                                                     Regulate body temperature 53
Proteinate 132
                                                     Regulated 130
Protein-Bound Iodine (PBI) 77
                                                     Regulation of acid-base balance 134
Protein-rich foods 282                               Regulatory functions 61
Proteins 7, 60, 134, 236, 296                        Related to the total calories in the diet 107
Proteinuria 317                                      Renal tubule 314
Proton 13
                                                     Requirement 131
Protoplasm 12
                                                     Requirements 107
Proved to be of value during drought and famine
                                                     Respiration 47
     110
410                                                Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Respiratory quotient (RQ) 76                       Severe deficiency of protein 67
Respiratory system 334                             Severe restriction of sodium 309
Resting energy expenditure (REE) 264               Severe vomiting, diarrhoea, diabetic acidosis 133
Retention of nutritive value during preparation    Sex 139
     239                                           Shallow frying 233
Retinoic acid 90                                   Short chain fatty acids 50
Retinol equivalent (RE) 89                         Simmering 232
Retinopathy 299                                    Simple proteins 60
Rheumatoid arthritis 54, 357                       Skeletal frame 47
Rhodopsin 90                                       Skin 334
Riboflavin 103                                     Skin milk powder 147
Riboflavin deficiency 152                          Skinfold measurements 263
Ribonucleic acid (RNA) 13                          Skull deformation 95
Ribose 40, 103                                     Sleep 77
Rickets 95                                         Small intestine 16, 281
Risk factors 302                                   Social functions of food 6
Roasting 233                                       Sodium 132, 296
                                                   Sodium pump 132
Saccharide 38
                                                   Sodium restricted diets 309
Saccharin 45                                       Soft diet 259, 267
Salt 130                                           Soft fiber-restricted diet 268
Salt formation 14                                  Soluble 88
Sample menu 297
                                                   Soluble in water 110
Satiety value 53
                                                   Sore tongue 109
Saturated and unsaturated fatty acid composition
                                                   Sources 47, 105, 107, 109, 110, 131
      of food fat 304
                                                   Sources of contamination of water 248
Saturated fatty acids 49, 51
                                                   Sources of vitamin A 92
Saturation 50
                                                   Spacing and time of meals 198
School lunch programmes 172
                                                   Special functions of amino acids 61
Scrotal dermititis 105
                                                   Speciality formulas 272
Scurvy 109
                                                   Specific dynamic action of foods 78
Seasonal variation 182
                                                   Specific immunity 330
Second degree burns 344
                                                   Specific surgery 347
Secondary feeding period 345
                                                   Sphingomyelins 52
Secretion of the bile 54
                                                   Spleen 110
Secretions 330
                                                   Spongy gums 112
Secretory mucous membrane 90
                                                   Sprouted pulses 110
Select an exercise programme 137
                                                   Stability 102
Selenium 96
                                                   Stable in acid medium 110
Self-care in diabetes 294
                                                   Starch 39
Semiessential amino acid 65
                                                   State of health 77
Semifluid chyme 281
                                                   Steaming of food 232
Semi-perishable foods 215
                                                   Stearic 51
Serum lipid levels 302
                                                   Sterols 47, 49, 52, 94
Severe cases 112
Index                                                                                           411

Stewing 232                                        Thyroid gland 155
Stomach 192, 281                                   Thyroid hormone calcitonin 95
Storage life of foods at 25ºC 221                  Thyroxine 42, 61
Storage of food 220                                Tie up free radicals 110
Storage of non-perishable foods 221                Tingling of extremities 109
Storage of perishable foods 223                    Tiny breaks occur in the walls 112
Storage of semi-perishable foods 222               Tissue synthesis 110
Strong capillary walls 109                         Tocopherol 96
Strong reducing agent 109, 110                     Toddlers 197
Stunted growth 67, 83                              Tonsillectomy 347
Sucrase 16, 41                                     Total parenteral nutrition (TPN) 273
Sufficient blood volume 138                        Toxoplasmosis 357
Sugar substitutes 45                               Trans 50
Sugars 167                                         Trans fatty acids 50
Sulphate 132                                       Transamination 23, 64
Sunshine vitamin 94                                Transfer of single carbon 108
Supplementary feeding 172                          Transmission of HIV infection 332
Supplementary foods for infants and toddlers 196   Transport of nutrients 61
Surgery 343, 346                                   Transport of the products of digestion 130
Surgical removal 327                               Treatment 279, 283, 334, 338, 341
Sweeteners 296                                     Treatment of anorexia nervosa 351
Symptoms of anorexia nervosa 351                   Treatment of water 248
Symptoms of scurvy 112                             Tricarboxylic Acid Cycle (TCA) 21
Synthesis 14                                       Trichinosis 220
Synthesis of a number of metabolites 108           Triglyceride molecules 52
Synthesis of nucleic acid 108                      Triglycerides 51
                                                   Trypsin 17
Teeth 347                                          Tryptophan 105
Testosterone 52                                    Tryptophan 61
Tetracyclines 357                                  Tube feeding 271
Texture in foods 242                               Tuberculosis 276
The digestive tract 334                            Tumor 325
The ileum 281                                      Type I 294
The intake of all beverages 131                    Type II 294
The jejunum 281                                    Types of immunity 330
Therapy 284, 289                                   Typhoid 276
Therapy of metabolic disorders 337                 Tyrosinemia 336
Thermal injury 343
Thiamin 100, 152, 237                              Undernutrition 5, 143
Thiamin pyrophosphate (TPP) 100                    Universal solvent 130
Thickened and scaly skin 112                       Unsaturated fatty acids 49, 50, 51
Third degree 344                                   Urea 64
Third type of diabetes 294                         Urea formation 24
Thymus 110                                         Uric acid 64
412                                                 Fundamentals of Foods, Nutrition and Diet Therapy

Urine 130                                           Vitamine E 96
Use of recommended dietary allowances (RDAs)        Vitamins 7, 88, 191, 193
      32                                            Vitamins A, D, B-complex and C 191
Use of steroids 142                                 Vitamins A, D, E & K 5, 18
Use of the food guide 170                           Vitamins and minerals 296
Utilisation 14                                      VLDL 60
                                                    Vomitting 103
Vanaspati 47
Various 139                                         Waste nitrogenous material 130
Vascular degeneration 91                            Water 7, 193, 231, 246
Vegetable oils 47, 96                               Water balance 130
Vegetarian dietary patterns 206                     Water balance study 131
Vehicle for fat transport 53                        Water we drink 131
Very low density lipoproteins (VLDL) 53             Water-soluble 88
Very small blood vessels 112                        Weakness 109
Villi 20                                            Weight of the individual 139
Visible cry 152                                     Wet beri-beri 152
Visible fats 47                                     White 109
Visible perspiration 130                            WHO 27
Vitamin A 89                                        WHO (World Health Organization) 5
Vitamin A activity 89                               FAO/WHO procedure 80
Vitamin A deficiency 147                            Whole grain cereals 101
Vitamin B12 108, 109                                Working capacity 150, 83
Vitamin B-complex deficiency 152                    Wound healing 110
Vitamin C 193, 237
Vitamin C rich vegetables and fruits 166            Xerophthalmia 94
Vitamin D 94, 193                                   Xerosis 90, 94
Vitamin K 96
                                                    Yoga 134
Vitamin K, folic acid and some B-complex vitamins
      18
